1 From situation to action: 'secondness'
We are approaching a domain which is easier to define: derived milieux assert their independence and start to become valid for themselves. Qualities and powers are no longer displayed in any- space-whatevers, no longer inhabit originary worlds, but are actualised directly in determinate, geographical, historical and social space-times. Affects and impulses now only appear as embodied in behaviour, in the form of emotions or passions which order and disorder it. This is Realism. It is true that there are all kinds of possible transitions. There was already a tendency for German Expressionism to install its shadows and its chiaroscuro in physically and socially defined spaces (Lang, Pabst). Conversely, a determinate milieu can actualise so much power that it is itself valid as an originary world or an any-space-whatever: we can see this in Swedish lyricism. It is nevertheless true that realism is defined by its specific level. On this level, it does not exclude fiction or even the dream. It can include the fantastic, the extraordinary, the heroic and above all melodrama. It can include exaggeration and lack of moderation, as long as these are of its own type. What constitutes realism is simply this: milieux and modes of behaviour, milieux which actualise and modes of behaviour which embody. The action-image is the relation between the two and all the varieties of this relation. It is this model which produced the universal triumph of the American cinema, to the point of acting as a passport for foreign directors who contributed to its formation.
The milieu always actualises several qualitiesand powers. It carries out a global synthesis of them, it is itself the Ambiance or the Encompasser [Englobant], whilst the qualities and the powers have become forces in the milieu. The milieu and its forces incurve on themselves, they act on the character, throw him a challenge, and constitute a situation in which he is caught. The character reacts in his turn (action properly speaking) so as to respond to the situation, to modify the milieu, or his relation with the milieu, with the situation, with other characters. He must acquire a new mode of being (habitus) or raise his mode of being to the demands of the milieu and of the
￼142 9 The action-image
situation. Out of this emerges a restored or modified situation, a new situation. Everything is individuated: the milieu as a particular space- time, the situation as determining and determinate, the collective as well as the individual character. And, as we have seen, according to Peirce's classification of images, it is the reign of 'secondness'; everything here is two by itself. Already, in the milieu, we distinguish the power-qualities and the state of things which actualises them. The situation,and the character or the action, are like two terms which are simultaneously correlative and antagonistic. The action in itself is a duel of forces, a series of duels: duel with the milieu, with the others, with itself. Finally, the new situation which emerges from the action forms a couple with the initial situation. This is the set [ensemble] of the action-image, or at least its first form. It constitutes the organic representation, which seems to be endowed with breath or respiration. For it expands towards the milieu and contracts from the action. More precisely, it expands or contracts on either side, according to the states of the situation and the demands of the action.
In the set, nevertheless, it can be said that there are, as it were, two inverse spirals, of which one narrows towards action and the other broadens towards the new situation: a form like an hour-glass, or an egg-timer, which includes both space and time. This organic and spiral representation has, as its formula, SAS' (from the situation to the transformed situation via the intermediary of the action). This formula seems to us to correspond to what Burch called 'the large form'.' This action-image or organic representation has two poles, or rather two signs, of which one refers primarily to the organic, and the other to the active or functional. We call the first synsign, in partial conformity with Peirce: the synsign is a set of power-qualities as actualised in a milieu, in a state of things or a determinate space-time.2 And we should like to call the other binomial, in order to designate every duel, that is to say, what is properly active in the action-image. There is a binomial as soon as the state of a force relates back to an antagonistic force, and particularly when - one (or both) of the forces being 'spontaneous' - it involves in its very exercise an effort to foresee the exercise of the other force: the agent acts as a function of what he thinks the other is going to do. Feints, parries and traps are therefore good illustrations of binomials. In a Western, the moment of the duel - when the street empties, when the hero comes out, walking with a very distinctive step, trying to guess where the other is and what he's going to do - is a binomial par excellence.
Take for example Sjostrom's The Wind (his first American film).
￼Situation to action 143
The wind never stops blowing across the plain. It is almost an originary naturalist world, or even an Expressionist any-space- whatever, the space of the wind as affect. But there is also a whole state of things which actualises this power, combines it with that of the prairie, in a determinate space, Arizona: a realist milieu. A girl from the South arrives in this country, which she is not used to, and finds herself caught in a series of duels, a physical duel with the milieu, a psychological duel with the hostile family which takes her in, a sentimental duel with the rough cowboy who is in love with her, a bodily duel with the cattle dealer who tries to rape her. Having killed the dealer she tries desperately to bury him in the sand, but the wind uncovers the corpse each time. This isthe moment at which the milieu throws down the strongest challenge to her, and where she reaches the essence [fond] of the duel. Reconciliation then begins: with the cowboy who understands and helps her, with the wind, whose power she comprehends as she feels a new mode of being growing within her.
How does this type of action-image develop through a number of great cinematographic genres? In the first place, the documentary. Toynbee has developed a pragmatic philosophy of history according to which civilisations were answers to the challenges thrown down by the milieu.3 While the normal or rather normative case is that of communities confronting challenges which are great, but not great enough to absorb all the capacities of man, one can conceive two other cases: the one in which the challenges of the milieu are so strong that man can only respond to them or parry them using all his energy (civilisation of survival); and the one in which the milieu is so favourable that man can devote himself to living (civilisation of leisure). Flaherty's documentaries consider these cases, and discover the nobility of these extreme civilisations. He is therefore unconcerned by criticisms that he is Rousseauist, that he neglects the political problems posed by primitive societies and the role of Whites in the exploitation of these societies. This would be to introduce a third, a thirdness which has nothing to do with the conditions fixed by Flaherty: to capture in the raw a tete-a-tete with the milieu (ethology rather than ethnology). Nanook of the North begins with the exposition of the milieu, when the Eskimo approaches with his family. An im- mense synsign of the opaque sky and the iceslopes where Nanook wins his struggle for survival in a- hostile milieu: the duel with the ice to build the igloo and above all, the famous duel with the seal. Here we have a grandiose SAS' structure, or rather SAS, since the grandeur of Nanook's actions lies less in modifying the situation than in
￼144 9 The action-image
surviving in an impervious milieu. Conversely, Moana shows us civilisation without challenge from Nature. But, as if man can only be man through effort and resistance to pain, he must compensate for an over-benevolent milieu by inventing for himself the trial of tattooing, which enables him to give himself up to a fundamental duel with himself.
In the second place, consider the psycho-social film: in the whole realist part of his work King Vidor was able to set up great global syntheses, moving from the collectivity to the individual and from the individual to the collectivity. Such a form can be called 'ethical'. Moreover it imposes itself in every genre, inasmuch as the ethos designates simultaneously the location or the milieu, the stay in a milieu, and the habit or the habitus, the mode of being. This ethical or realist form, far from excluding the dream, embraces the two poles of the American Dream: on the one hand the idea of a unanimist community or of a nation-milieu, melting pot and fusion of all minorities (the unanimous burst of laughter at the end of The Crowd, or the same expression which breaks out on the face of a Chinaman, a Black and a White, in Street Scene); on the other hand the idea of a leader, that is, a man of this nation who knows how to respond to the challenges of the milieu as to the difficulties of a situation (Our Daily Bread, An American Romance). This well directed unanimism circulates even through the most serious crises and leaves a place only to be formed again elsewhere: lost by the city, it passes into the agricultural communities, then leaps 'from corn to steel', to large-scale industry. None the less the unanimity can be false and the individual left to his own resources. Was this not precisely the case in The Crowd, where the town was only a human, artificial and indifferent collectivity and the individual, an abandoned being, deprived of resources and of reactions? The figure SAS', in which the individual modifies the situation, has as its opposite a situation, SAS, such that the individual no longer knows what to do and at best finds himself in the same situation once more: the American nightmare in The Crowd,
It may even be that the situation gets worse, and that the indi- vidual falls lower and lower, in a descending spiral: SAS". The American cinema admittedly prefers to present characters who are already degraded, like Howard Hawks' alcoholics, whose struggle to rise again will form the story. But even when it shows the process of degradation the approach is clearly completely different from that of Expressionism or naturalism. It is no longer a matter of a fall into a black hole, nor of an entropy as a decline in impulse (although King Vidor came close to this naturalist point of view).
￼Situation to action 145
Realist degradation - in the American manner - was to slip into the milieu-behaviour, situation-action, mould. It does not express a destiny of the affect or a destiny of impulses but a pathology of the milieu and a behavioural disorder. It is heir to a dazzling literary tradition, that of Fitzgerald or Jack London: 'Drinking was one of the modes of existence that I was leading, a habit of the men with whom I was mixed up. . . .' Degradaton marks a man who frequents milieux without law, of false unanimity or false community, and can only maintain falsely integrated forms of behaviour, cracked ways of behaving which can no longer succeed in organising their own segments. This man is a 'born loser', 'takes it too hard'. It is the world of the bars in Wilder's Lost Weekend (in spite of the happy ending), it is the world of billiards in Rossen's The Hustler, and it isabove all the criminal world linked to prohibition, which was to constitute the great genre of the film noir. From this point of view, the film noir describes the milieu, sets out situations, holds itself back in preparation for action and action which is precisely organised (the model of the hold-up for example), and finally emerges into a new situation, the most common being re-established order. But, in fact, if the gangsters are born losers - in spite of the power of their milieu and the effectiveness of their actions - it is because something eats away at both, reversing the spiral to their cost. On the one hand the 'milieu' is a false community, in fact a jungle where every alliance is precarious and reversible; on the other hand, the modes of behaviour, however studied they are, are not true habits, true responses to situations, but conceal a fault or cracks which cause them to disintegrate. This is the story of Hawks' Scarf ace, where all the hero's cracks, all the little faults which made him take it too hard, converge in the appalling crisis to which he succumbs on the death of his sister. O r , in a different way, in Huston's Asphalt Jungle, the doctor's extreme attention to detail and the killer's skill cannot resist the treason of a minor character who opens up in the one the little crack of eroticism, and in the other the nostalgia for his native country, and leads them both to failure or death. Are we to conclude that society ismade in the image of its crimes, and that all milieux are pathological, and all modes of behaviour are cracked? This would be closer to Lang or Pabst. But the American cinema had the means to save its dream by passing through nightmares.
The Western is a fourth great genre, and is solidly anchored in a milieu. Since Ince, and according to the formula SAS' (we will see that this is not the only formula of the Western), the milieu is the Ambiance or the Encompasser. Here, the principal quality of the
￼146 9 The action-image
image is breath, respiration. It not only inspires the hero, but brings things together in a whole of organic representation and contracts or expands depending on the circumstances. When colour takes possession of this world, it follows a chromatic scale where it diffuses, and where the saturated [sature] resonates with the faint [lave] (we will rediscover this ambiant colour in the artificial sets [decors] of Ford's How Green Was My Valley). The ultimate encompasser is the sky and its pulsations, not only in Ford, but also in Hawks who makes one of the characters in Big Sky say: it is a big country, the only thing which isbigger isthesky. . . . Encompassed by the sky, the milieu in turn encompasses the collectivity. It isas representative of the collectivity that the hero becomes capable of an action which makes him equal to the milieu and re-establishes its accidentally or periodically endangered order: mediations of the community and of the land* are necessary in order to form a leader and render an individual capable of such a great action. We recognise the world of Ford, with the intense collective moments (marriage, festival, dances and songs), the constant presence of the land and the immanence of the sky. Some have concluded from this that there isa closed space in Ford, without real movement or time.5 It seems to us, rather, that movement is real but, instead of happening from part to pan, or in relation to a whole whose change it would express, it happens in an encompasser, whose respiration it expresses. The outside encompasses the inside, both communicate, and we advance by passing from the one to the other in both directions, as in the images of Stagecoach where the diligence inside alternates with the diligence seen from the outside. One can go from a known to an unknown point, the promised land, as in Wagonmaster: the essential point remains the encompasser which includes both and which expands as one advances painfully and contracts when one stops and rests. Ford's originality lies in the fact that only the encompasser gives measure to movement, or the organic rythmn. It is thus the melting pot of minorities, that is, what brings them together, what reveals their correspondences even when they appear to be opposed, what already shows the fusion between them necessary for the birth of a nation: for example, the three groups of persecuted people who meet in Wagonmaster - the Mormons, the travelling players and the Indians.
If one remains at this first approximation, one is in an SAS structure which has become cosmic or epic - the hero becomes equal to the milieu via the intermediary of the community, and does not modify the milieu, but re-establishes cyclic order in it.' However, it would be
￼Situation to action 147
dangerous to reserve an epic genius for Ince and Ford, attributing to other more recent directors the invention of a tragic or even a romantic Western. The application of Hegel's and Lukacs' formula of the succession of these genres works badly for the Western: as Mitry has shown, from the outset the Western explores all the directions - epic, tragic, romantic - with cowboys who are already nostalgic, solitary, ageing, or even born losers, or rehabilitated Indians.7 Throughout his work, Ford constantly grasps the evolution of a situation, which introduces a perfectly real time. There is certainly a great difference between the Western and what can be called the neo-Western; but it is not explicable in terms of a succession of genres, or of a transition from the closed to the open in space. In Ford, the hero is not content to re-establish the episodically threatened order. The organisation of the film, the organic represen- tation, is not a circle, but a spiral where the situation of arrival differs from the situation of departure: SAS'. It is an ethical rather than an epic form. In The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance the bandit is killed and order re-established: but the cowboy who has killed him allows us to think that it is the future senator, thus accepting the transformation of the law which ceases to be the tacit epic law of the West in order to become the written or novelistic law of industrial civilisation. Similarly, in Two Rode Together, where this time the sheriff gives up his job and refuses to accept the evolution of the small town.8 In both cases Ford invents an interesting procedure, which is the modified image: an image is shown twice, but the second time, it is modified or completed in such a way as to make us feel the difference between S and S'. In Liberty Valance the end shows the true death of the bandit and the cowboy who shoots, whilst we had previously seen the truncated image which the official version would stick to (it is the future senator who killed the bandit). In Two Rode
Together, we are shown the same silhouette of the sheriff in the same posture, but it is no longer the same sheriff. It is true that between the two, between S and S', there is a lot of ambiguity and hypocrisy. The hero of Liberty Valance is bent on cleansing himself of the crime in order to become a respectable senator, whilst the journalists are bent on leaving him his legend, without which he would be nothing. And as Roy has shown, Two Rode Together has as its subject the spiral of money which, from the start, undermines the community and goes on to enlarge its empire.
But one might say that, in both cases, what counts for Ford is that the community can develop certain illusions about itself. This would be the great difference between healthy and pathogenic milieux. Jack
￼148 9 The action-image
London wrote fine passages in order to show that, finally, the alcoholic community has no illusions about itself. Far from producing dreams, alcohol 'refuses to let the dreamer dream', it acts as a 'pure reason' which convinces us that life is a masquerade, the community a jungle, life a despair (hence the sneering of the alcoholic). The same could be said of criminal communities. On the contrary, a community is healthy in so far as a kind of consensus reigns, a consensus which allows it to develop illusions about itself, about its motives, about its desires and its cupidity, about its values and its ideals: 'vital' illusions, realist illusions which are more true than pure truth.9 Ford also took this point of view, and in The Informer, showedthealmostExpressionistdegradationofatreacherous informer in so far as he can no longer have any illusions. One cannot, therefore, criticise the American dream for being only a dream: this is what it wants to be, drawing all its power from the fact that it is a dream. For Ford, as for Vidor, society changes, and does not stop changing, but its changes take place in an Encompasser which covers them and blesses them with a healthy illusion as continuity of the nation.
Finally, the American cinema constantly shoots and reshoots a single fundamental film, which is the birth of a nation-civilisation, whose first version was provided by Griffith. It has in common with the Soviet cinema the belief in a finality of universal history; here the blossoming of the American nation, there the advent of the proletariat. But, with the Americans, organic representation is obviously unaware of dialectical development; it and it alone is the whole of history, the germinating stock from which each nation- civilisation detaches itself as an organism, each prefiguring America. This is the origin of the deeply analogical or parallelist character of this conception of history, as it is found in Griffith's Intolerance which intersperses four periods, or in the first version of Cecil B. De Mille's Ten Commandments, which puts two periods into parallel, the latter being America. The decadent nations are sick organisms, like Griffith's Babylon or De Mille's Rome. If the Bible is fundamental to them, it is because the Hebrews, then the Christians, gave birth to healthy nation-civilisations which already displayed the two charac- teristics of the American dream: that of a melting pot in which minorities are dissolved and that of a ferment which creates leaders capable of reacting to all situations. Conversely, Ford's Lincoln recapitulates biblical history, judging as perfectly as Solomon, bringing about, like Moses, the transition from the nomadic to the written law, from nomos to logos, entering the city on his ass like
￼Situation to action 149
Christ (Young Mr Lincoln). And if the historical film thus forms a great genre of the American cinema, it is perhaps because, in the conditions peculiar to America, all the other genres were already historical, whatever their degree of fiction: crime with gangsterism, adventure with the Western, had the status of pathogenic or exemplary historical structures.
It is easy to make fun of Hollywood's historical conceptions. It seems to us, on the contrary, that they bring together the most serious aspects of history as seen by the nineteenth century. Nietzsche distinguished three of these aspects, 'monumental history', 'antiquarian history' and 'critical', or rather ethical, history.10 The monumental aspect concerns the physical and human encompasser, the natural and architectural milieu. Babylon and its defeat, in Griffith, the Hebrews, the desert and the sea which opens; or, in Cecil B. De Mille, the Philistines, Dagon's temple and its destruction by Samson, are immense synsigns which make the image itself monumental. The treatment can be very different; whether great frescos in The Ten Commandments, or a series of engravings in Samson and Delilah, the image remains sublime, and although the temple of Dagon can trigger off our laughter, it is an Olympian laughter which takes hold of the spectator. According to Nietzsche's analysis, such an aspect of history favours the analogies or parallels between one civilisation and another: the great moments of humanity, however distant they are, are supposed to communicate via the peaks, and form a 'collection of effects in themselves' which can be more easily compared and act all the more strongly on the mind of the modern spectator. Monumental history thus naturally tends towards the universal, and finds its masterpiece in Intolerance, because the different periods do not simply follow one another, but alternate through an extraordinary rhythmic montage (Buster Keaton gives a comic version of it in Three Ages). And, in whatever manner it proceeded, a confrontation of periods continued to be the dream of the monumental history film even in Eisenstein.11 This conception of history has, however, a big disadvantage:that of treating phenomena as effects in themselves, separate from any cause. Nietzsche had already pointed this out and it is what Eisenstein criticises in the American historical and social cinema. Not only are civilisations considered to be parallel, but the principal phenomena of a single civilisation, for example, the rich and the poor, are treated as 'two parallel independent phenomena', as pure effects that are observed, if necessary with regret, but nevertheless without having any cause assigned to them. Hence, it is inevitable that causes are rejected from
￼150 9 The action-image
another perspective, and only appear in the form of individualduels which sometimes oppose a representative of the poor and a representative of the rich, sometimes a decadent and a man of the future, sometimes a just man and a traitor, etc. Eisenstein's strength thus lies in showing that the principal technical aspects of American montage since Griffith - the alternate parallel montage which makes up the situation, and the alternate concurrent montage which leads to the duel - relate back to this social and bourgeois historical conception. It is this essential defect that Eisenstein wants to remedy: he demands a presentation of true causes, which would have to subject the monumental to a 'dialectical' construction (in any event, the struggle of classes instead of that of a traitor, a decadent or an evildoer).12
If monumental history considers effects in themselves, and if the only causes it understands are simple duels opposing individuals, antiquarian history must occupy itself with these as well, and reconstitute their forms which are habitual to the epoch: wars and confrontations, gladiator combats, chariot races, tournaments, etc. And antiquarian history is not satisfied with duels in the strict sense, it stretches out towards the external situation and contracts intorhe means of action and intimate customs, vast tapestries, clothes, finery, machines, weapons or tools, jewels,private objects. The orgy allows gigantism and intimacy to coexist. The antiquarian runs parallel to the monumental. Here again facile ironical remarks are made about Hollywood reconstructions, and the 'brand-new' appearance of the props: the new is, as in the antiquarian, the sign of the actualisation of the epoch. The fabrics become a fundamental element of the historical film, especially with the colour-image, as in Samson and Delilah, where the display of cloth by the merchant and Samson's theft of the thirty tunics, constitute the two peaks of colour. Machines also form a peak, whether they give birth to a new nation- civilisation, or whether on the contrary they announce its decline or disappearance. In his only historicalfilm strictly speaking, Land of the Pharaohs, Hawks only seems to be interested in one moment, the whole ending, where the architect has become an engineer as well, and has set up an extraordinary new machine for the Pharaoh which combines sand and stone, flowing sand and descending stone, so that the pyramid's funeral chamber can be absolutely hermetically closed.
Finally, it is true that the monumental and antiquarian conceptions of history would not come together so well without the ethical image which measures and organises them both. As Cecil B. De Mille says,
￼Laws of organic composition 151
it is a matter of Good and Evil, with all the temptations or the horrors of Evil (the barbarians, the unbelievers, the intolerant, the orgy, etc.). The ancient or recent past must submit to trial, go to court, in order to disclose what it is that produces decadence and what it is that produces new life; what the ferments of decadence and the germs of new life are, the orgy and the sign of the cross, the omnipotence of the rich and the misery of the poor. A strong ethical judgement must condemn the injustice of 'things', bring compassion, herald the new civilisation on the march, in short, constantly rediscover America. . . more especially as, from the beginning, all examination of causes has been dispensed with. The American cinema is content to illustrate the weakening of a civilisation in the milieu, and the intervention of a traitor in the action. But the marvel is that, with all these limits, it has succeeded in putting forward a strong and coherent conception of universal history, monumental, antiquarian and ethical.13
2 The laws of organic composition
What are the laws of the action-image across all these genres? The first concerns the action-image as organic representation in its entirety [ensemble]. It is structural because the places and the moments are well defined in their oppositions and their complemen- tarities. From the point of view of the situation (S), from the point of view of space, of the frame and of the shot, it organises the way in which the milieu carries several powers into effect, the weight given to each one. For example, in Ford's skies, the conflict or the agreement of these powers, the particular role of the earth, of the land, which is both one power among others, and the location of confrontation or of reconciliation of all of them; but also the way in which the whole incurves itself around the group, the character or the home, constituting an encompasser from which the hostile or favourable forces are detached, the way in which the Indians appear on top of a hill, at the boundary between earth and sky. . . .And, from the point of view of time or of the succession of shots, it organises the passage from S to S', the great respiration, the alternation of moments of contraction and of expansion, the alternations of outside and inside, the division of the principal situation into secondary situations which are like so many little local missions within the global mission. In all these respects, organic representation is a spiral of development which includes spatial and temporal caesuras. We rediscover this conception in Eisenstein, although he conceives of the distribution
￼152 9 The action-image
and succession of vectors on the spiral entirely differently. For Griffith and the American cinema, alternate parallel montage is sufficient to organise empirically the mutual link between the vectors.
Alternate montage includes another figure, no longer parallel, but concurrent or convergent. The passage from S to S' takes place through the intermediary of A, the decisive action, most often placed very close to S'. The synsign must contract into a binomial or duel in order for the powers which it actualises to be redistributed in a new way, to be pacified or to recognise the triumph of one of them. The second law therefore governs the passage from S to A. Now the decisive action or the duel can only arise if, from various points of the encompasser, lines of action emanate converging on this occasion to make possible the ultimate individual confrontation, the modifying reaction. These are the lines of action which are the object of alternate convergent montage, the second figure of montage in Griffith. But perfection was, perhaps, achieved by Lang, in M (which, in fact, prepared Lang's departure for America). It is in analysing the convergent montage of this film that Noel Burch advances the notion of 'large form'. Indeed, the global situation is first of all displayed in a determined and individuated space-time: the courtyard of the building in the town, the landing and the kitchen of an apartment in the building, the journey from the apartment to the school, the posters on the walls, people's excitement. . . . But very quickly two points emerge from this milieu, then two lines of action which will alternate constantly in converging, with continual 'rhymes' from one to the other and form a pincer to grab the criminal: the line of the police and the lineof the underworld (which fears that thechild-killer will harm its activities). It will be noted that, by virtue of the strongly structural character of organic representation, the negative or positive hero's place has been prepared long before he comes to occupy it and even before he knows he is to occupy it: hence the progressive unmasking of the murderer. And it is when the underworld lays hands on him that we witness the real action and really know the murderer. It is M's duel with the tribunal of bandits and beggars. The double line with its caesuras and its rhymes has led us to the situation of the duel, from the synsign to the binomial. The organicrepresentation, itistrue,retainsitsfinalambiguity:for,when the police catch up with the underworld, and snatch the killerfrom it to bring him before a legal tribunal, we do not know whether the situation will emerge from it modified, re-established, cleansed of the crime, or whether nothing will be like it was before, and crime,
￼Laws of organic composition 153
always destined to take on new forms ('now, we will have to keep a closer eye on the little ones'): S' or S?
The third law is like the reverse of the second. In fact, while alternate montage is absolutely necessary to the passage from situation to action, it seems that in the action which is thus compressed, at the very root of the duel, there is something which rebels against any montage. We might call this third law, Bazin's law or the law of 'forbidden montage'. Andre Bazin showed that if two independent actions which coincide at the production of an effect are amenable to montage, then in the effect produced there must be a moment where two terms confront each other face to face and must be seized in an irreducible simultaneity, without the possibility of resorting to a montage, or even to a shot-reverse shot. Bazin cites as an example Chaplin's The Circus: all trick shots are permitted, but Charlie really has to go into the lion's cage and be with the lion in a single shot. Nanook and the seal must also confront one another in the same shot.14 This law of the binomial no longer concerns SS', nor SA, but A for itself.
The duel is moreover not a unique and localised moment of the action-image. The duel stakes out the lines of action, always marking the necessary simultaneities. The passage from situation to action is thus accompanied by a dovetailing of duels in each other. The binomial is a polynomial. Even in the Western, which presents the duel in its purest state, it is difficult to mark out its boundaries in the final instance. Is the duel that of the cowboy with the bandit or the Indian? Or with the woman, with the boyfriend, with the new man who will supersede him (as in Liberty Valance)? In M, is the real duel between M and the police or society, or rather between M and the underworld which does not want him? Does not the real duel remain elsewhere? Finally, it might be external to the film, although internal to the cinema. In the scene of the underworld tribunal, the bandits and the beggars vindicate the rights of the crime habitus or mode of behaviour, crime as rational organisation, and criticise M for acting through passion. To which M replies that this is what makes him innocent: he cannot do otherwise, he only acts through impulse or affect, and at precisely this moment, and only at this moment the actor acts in an Expressionist way. Finally, is not the true duel in M between Lang himself and Expressionism? It is his farewell to Expressionism, it is his entry into realism as The Testament of Dr Mabuse will confirm (in which Mabuse disappears, giving way to the frigid realist organisation).
But if there is in this way a whole dovetailing of duels, it is by
￼154 9 The action-image
reason of a fifth law: there is necessarily a big gap between the encompasser and the hero, the milieu and the behaviour which modifies it, situation and action, which can only be bridged progressively, throughout the length of the film. One can imagine a situation which would become instantaneously converted into a duel, but this would be 'burlesque'. In a short masterpiece (The Fatal Glass of Beer), Fields opens the door of his cabin in the frozen North at regular intervals protesting 'it's not fit to put a dog out', and immediately receives two anonymous snowballs right in the face. But, normally, the path from the milieu to the final duel isa long one. This is because the hero is not immediately ripe for action; like Hamlet, the action to be undertaken is too great for him. It is not that he is weak: he is, on the contrary, equal to the encompasser but only potentially. His grandeur and his power must be actualised. He must give up his withdrawal and his internal peace, or he must rediscover the strengths of which the situation has deprived him, or he must await the favourable moment when he will receive the necessary support of a community and of a team. Indeed, the hero needs a people, a fundamental group which gives him its blessing, but also a makeshift group which helps him, which is smaller and more heterogeneous. He must cope with the failings and the betrayals of the one as with the evasions of the other. These are variables that are found in the historical film as well as in the Western. Even in Eisenstein, what Soviet critics did not appreciate was the Hamletian character of Ivan the Terrible: the two great moments of doubt through which he passes, like two caesuras of the film; and also his aristocratic nature which means that the people cannot serve as the fundamental group for him, but only as a makeshift group which he uses as a tool. In general the hero must pass through moments of impotence, internal or external. What produces the intensity of Cecil B. De Mille's Samson and Delilah are the images which show Samson blind and turning the millstone, then weighed down with chains and pushed into the temple enclosure, groping his way along, hopping about under the gnashing jaws of the cats who are being excited by the grotesque dwarves; finally, all his power regained, making the enormous column of the temple slide on its plinth, in an image which 'rhymes' with that of his extreme powerlessness, when he makes the grinding millstone turn. Conversely, the cat's jaws which bite the powerless Samson rhyme with the ass'sjawbonewhich the powerful Samson used at the beginning to knock out his attackers. In short, a whole spatio-temporal advance is intertwined with the process of actualisation, by which the hero becomes 'capable' of action; and his
￼Sensory-motor link \55
power becomes equal to that of the encompasser. Occasionally one even sees a relay between two characters, such that the one loses his capability as the state of things itself evolves, whilst the other gains that capability: from Moses to Joshua. Ford is fond of this dualist structure which indicates another binomial: the man of law who takes over from the man of the West in Liberty Valance; or, in The Grapes of
Wrath, the matriarchal mother of the agriculturalfamily, who ceases 'to see clearly' as the group decays, while the son begins to see clearly as he understands the meaning and significance of the new fight. From all these points of view, organic representation is ruled by this last law of development: there must be a big gap between the situation and the action to come, but this gap only exists to be filled, by a process marked by caesuras, as so many retrogressions and progressions.
3 The sensory-motor link
The action-image inspires a cinema of behaviour (behaviourism), since behaviour is an action which passes from one situation to another, which responds to a situation in order to try to modify it or to set up a new situation. Merleau-Ponty saw in this rise of behaviour a sign common to the modern novel, to modern psychology and to the spirit of the cinema.15 But from this perspective, the sensory- motor link must be very strong, behaviour must be truly structured. The great organic representation, SAS', must not only be composed, but engendered: on the one hand the situation must permeate the character deeply and continuously, and on the other hand the character who is thus permeated must burst into action, at discontinuous intervals. This is the formula of realist violence, completely different from naturalist violence. The structure is that of an egg: a vegetable or vegetative pole (permeation) and an animal pole (acting-out). We know that the action-image, in this sense, found its systematisation in the Actors Studio and in Kazan's cinema. It is here that a sensory-motor schema takes possession of the image, and that a genetic element tends to emerge. From the outset, the rules of the Actors Studio applied not only to the actor's acting out but also to the conception and unfolding of the film, its framings, its cutting, its montage. We must infer the one from the other, the realist nature of the film from the acting of the actor and conversely.-Now it is clear that the actor is never neutral, and never stationary. When he is not bursting out he is being permeated and never remains tranquil. For the actor as for the character, the basic neurosis is hysteria. The
￼156 9 The action-image
vegetative pole's movement on the spot is in fact just as great as the violent movement of the animal pole. Spongy permeation has as much intensity as acting-out, as sudden extension. For this very reason this structural and genetic representation of the action-image gives rise to a formula whose applications are truly infinite. Kazan advised that people in conflict should be made to eat together: the common absorption would make the eruption of duels even stronger. Let us consider a recent film which applies the Method or the System: Arthur Penn's Georgia. One scene shows a dinner which brings together the girl's multi-millionaire father and the immigrant proletarian fiance; we see the tension being internalised in the protagonists; then the father says, 'I'm not in the habit of giving away what belongs to me', and these words are like an explosion which modify the situation because they introduce the new element of an
incestuous relation between father and daughter. Later, at the engagement party, the father, almost imperceptible, blurred behind a great bay window, seems to become permeated with the situation like a poisonous plant; only a small child notices and waits for him; and the father rushes outside, kills his daughter and gravely wounds the fiance, again modifying the situation by this animal acting-out.
This is like the differentiation of life according to Bergson: the plant, or the vegetable, undertakes the task of accumulating the explosive, on the spot, whilst the animal undertakes its detonation, in sudden movements.16 Fuller's originality was perhaps to have taken this differentiation as far as it would go, even if it meant proceeding by fits and starts and breaking up sequences. The war film favours this with its interminable waiting and its permeations of atmosphere on the one hand and on the other its brutal explosions and its acting- out. At the limit Fuller was to find the figures of his violence in the vegetative madmen who stand like plants in the corridor of Corridor Shock and in the racist dog of White Dog which explodes in acts of attack. It is true that madmen have their own unforeseeable detonations, and that the dog had its long mysterious period of
permeation. 'I explained to the dog that it was an actor. . . .' But Fuller also knows how to explain it to plants. What counts for him is this extreme dissociation which renews and augments each of the two aspects of the violence, and which sometimes carriesout an inversion of the poles: it isthe situationwhich then attainsasombrenaturalism.
Kazan is also able to dissociate the poles, and Baby Doll is one of the finest vegetative films, expressing both the slow and poisonous life of the South and the vegetable existence of the young woman at the cradle. But what interests Kazan, and what determines the evolution
￼Sensory-motor link 157
of his work, is the linking of permeations and explosions so as to obtain a continuous structuring rather than a structure with two poles. The elongated format of cinemascope reinforces this tendency. And this is the orthodoxy of the Actors Studio: a great 'global mission', SAS', is divided into successive and continuous 'local missions' (si, al, s2, a2, s3 . . .). In America,Americaeach sequence has its geography, its sociology, its psychology, its tonality, its situation which depends on the preceding action, and which gives rise to a new action, drawing the hero in turn into the succeeding situation, each time by permeation and explosion, until the final explosion (involving the New York waterfront). Plundered, pros- tituted, murderer, fiance, traitor, the hero moves through these sequences which are all encompassed in the great mission which is present throughout, to escape Anatolia (S) in order to reach New York (S')- And the encompasser, the great mission, sanctifiesthehero or at least acquits him of all he had to do both here and there: dishonoured externally, he has saved his inward honour, the purity of his heart and the future of his family. Not that he finds peace. It is the world of Cain, it is the sign of Cain, which knows no peace, but makes innocence and guilt, shame and honour correspond to each other in a hysterical neurosis: what is and remains humiliation in a particular local situation is also the heroism required by the great global situation, the price that must be paid. On the Waterfront abundantly develops this theology: if I don't betray others, I betray myself and I betray justice. One has to go through many dirty permeating situations, and through many humiliating explosions, in order to catch a glimpse through them of the impression which cleanses us and the detonation which saves or pardons us. East of Eden is the great biblical film, the story of Cain and of betrayal, which obsesses, in different ways, Nicholas Ray and Samuel Fuller.17 This theme had always been there in the American cinema and in its conception of History, sacred and profane. But now it has become the essential point: Cain has turned realist. What is curious, with Kazan, is the way in which the American Dream and the action- image grow tougher together. The American Dream is affirmed more and more to be a dream, nothing other than a dream, contradicted by the facts; but it draws from this a sudden burst of increased power since it now encompasses actions such as betrayal and calumny (the very ones that the dream had the purpose of excluding according to Ford). And it is precisely after the war - at the very moment when the American Dream is collapsing, and when the action-image is entering a definitive crisis, as we will see - that the
￼158 9 The action-image
dream finds its most fertile form, and action its most violent, most detonating, schema. This is the final agony of the action cinema, even if films of this type go on being made for a long time yet.
The cinema of behaviour is not content with a simple sensory- motor formula, even of the conditioned reflex arc type. It is a much more complex behaviourism which essentially took into account internal factors.18 Indeed, what must appear on the outside is what happens inside the character, at the intersection of the situation which permeates and the action which is to detonate. This is the rule of the Actors Studio: only the inner counts, but this inner is not beyond or hidden, it is not the same as the genetic element of behaviour, which must be shown. This is not a perfecting of action, it is the absolutely necessary condition of the development of the action-image. This realist image indeed never forgets that it is presenting by definition, fictitious situations and sham action: one does not 'really' find oneself in a desperate situation and one does not kill or one does not 'really' drink. It is only theatre or cinema. The great realist actors are perfectly conscious of this and the Actors Studio offers them a method. On the one hand a sensory contact must be established with the objects adjacent to the situation: even an imaginary contact with a material, with a glass, a particular sort of glass, or a fabric, a costume, an instrument, some chewing gum to chew. On the other hand the object must, in this way, awaken an affective memory, reactualise an emotion which is not necessarily identical, but is analogous to that
which the role calls up.19 Handling a nearby object, awakening an emotion corresponding to the situation - it is by this internal link between the object and the emotion that the external linking of the fictitious situation and the sham action will take place. The Actors Studio does not invite the actor to identify himself with his role any more than any other method; what characterises it is the reverse operation, by which the realist actor is supposed to identify the role with certain inner elements that he possesses and selects in himself.
But the inner element is not merely the actor's training, it appears in the image - hence the constant agitation of the actor. It is in itself, and directly, an element of behaviour, sensory-motor training. It adjusts permeation and explosion to each other. The pair of object and emotion thus appears in the action-image as its genetic sign. The object will be grasped in all its virtualities (used, sold, bought, exchanged, broken, accepted, rejected . . .) at the same time as the corresponding, actualised,emotions:forexampleinAmerica,America, the knife given by the grandmother, the abandoned shoes, the fezand the straw hat which correspond to S and S'. There is in all these cases
￼Sensory-motor link 159
an emotion/object pair which belongs to realism alone, but is equivalent in its own way to that of the impulse and the fetish, or of the affect and the face. Not that cinema of behaviour necessarily avoids the close-up (Tailleur analyses a very fine image in Baby Doll where the man literally 'enters' the close-up of the young woman, his hand venturing across the face, his lips at the edge of the hair).20 It is nevertheless true that the emotional handling of an object, an act of emotion in relation to the object, can have more effect than a close-up in the action-image. In a situation in On the Waterfront, where the woman behaves ambivalently, and where the man feels timid and guilty, he picks up the glove that she has dropped, keeps it and plays with it, finally slipping it on to his hand.21 It is like a genetic or embryonic sign for the action-image, that could be called Impression (emotional object) and which already functions as a 'symbol' in the sphere of behaviour. It simultaneously brings together, in a strange way, the unconscious of the actor, the personal guilt of the director, the hysteria of the image, such as the burnt hand, for example, the impression which constantly arises in Dmytryk's films. In its most general definition, the impression is the inner, but visible, link between the permeating situation and the explosive action.
￼10 The action-image The small form
1 From action to situation
We must now consider a completely different aspect of the action- image. As the action-image on all its levels always brings together 'two', it is not surprising that it should have two different aspects itself. The large form - SAS' - moved from the situation to the action, which modified the situation. But there is another form, which, on the contrary, moves from the action to the situation, towards a new action:ASA'.Thistimeitistheactionwhichdisclosesthesituation,a fragment or an aspect of the situation, which triggers off a new action. The action advances blindly and the situation is disclosed in darkness, or in ambiguity. From action to action, the situation gradually emerges, varies, and finally either becomes clear or retains its mystery. We have called the action-image which moves from the situation as encompasser (synsign) to the action as duel (binomial) the 'large form'. For convenience, we will given the name 'small form' to the action-image which moves from an action, a mode of behaviour, or a 'habitus', to a partially disclosed situation. It is a reversed sensory-motor schema. A representation like this is no longer global but local. It is no longer spiral but elliptical. It is no longer structural but constructed round events [evenementielle]. It is no longer ethical, but comedic (we say 'comedic', because this
representation gives rise to a comedy, although it it not necessarily comic, and may be dramatic). The sign of which this new action- image is made up is the index.
This action-image seems to have become particularly self- conscious in Public Opinion, the film which Chaplin directed, but did not appear in, and in the whole of Lubitsch's work. Even at the level of a superficial analysis, we can see that there are two sorts or two poles of the index. In a first case, an action (or an equivalent of action, a simple gesture) discloses a situation which is not given. The situation is thus deduced from the action, by immediate inference, or by relatively complex reasoning. Since the situation is not given for itself, the index here is an index of lack; it implies a gap in the narrative, and corresponds to the first sense of the French word ''ellipse'.,' For example, in Public Opinion, Chaplin insisted on the gap
￼Action to situation 161
of a year, which was not filled by anything, but which we can infer from the new behaviour and clothes of the heroine, who has become a rich man's mistress. Similarly, the faces did not merely have an autonomous expressive or affective value, but neither did they simply indicate what was going on off screen: they really did function as indices of a global situation. Thus the famous image of the train, whose arrival we only see from the lights which pass across the woman's face, or the erotic images which we can only infer from the spectators. The examples are even more striking when the index involves a process of reasoning, however rapid it may be: thus 'a chamber maid opens a chest of drawers, and a man's collar accidentally falls on the floor, revealing Edna's liaison'.2 In Lubitsch, we constantly find these rapid reasoning processes introduced into the image itself, which then functions as an index. In Design for Living, a film which has retained all its audacity, since the heroine lays claim ingenuously or unaffectedly to the right to live and cohabit with two lovers, one of them sees the other in the early morning in a dinner jacket. He concludes from this index (and so does the spectator), that his friend has spent the night with the young woman. The index thus consists in the following: that one of the characters is 'too' dressed up, too well-dressed in evening clothes, for him not to have spent the night in a very intimate situation which has not been shown. This is a reasoning-image.
There is a second, more complex type of index, an index of equivocity, which corresponds to the second (geometrical) sense of the word 'ellipse'. In Public Opinion, many indices of the first type lead us to think that the heroine is not very attached to the man who loves her (her little enigmatic smiles). On the other hand, she has a more equivocal relationship with her rich lover, which leads the spectator to wonder constantly whether she is attached to him by fortune, luxury, and a certain complicity, or whether she loves him with a much more profound and all-embracing love. The same question arises in Lubitsch's Bluebeard's Eighth Wife.n these cases, we are made to hesitate by a whole world of details, another type of indices; not because of something which is lacking, or which is not given, but by virtue of an equivocity which completely belongs to the index (thus the scene of the necklace thrown off and recovered in Public Opinion). It is as if an action, a mode of behaviour, concealed a slight difference, which was nevertheless sufficient to relate it simultaneously to two quite distant situations, situations which are worlds apart. Or as if two actions, two gestures, were very slightly different, and nevertheless in their infinitesimal difference, referred to
￼162 10 The action-image
two opposable or opposing situations. The two situations may be such that one is real and the other apparent or illusory, but they may both be real and finally, they can interchange to such an extent that the one becomes real and the other apparent, and vice versa. Some of these cases are commonplace in any kind of film: for example the innocent man assumed to be guilty (a man holds a knife by a corpse: is it because he has killed him, or has he just pulled the knife out?). The more complex cases which we have just mentioned are more interesting. They allow us to identify the law of the new index: a very slight difference in the action, or between two actions, leads to a very great distance between two situations. This is an ellipse, in the second sense of the word - ageometrical figure - sincethedistantsituationsarelikea double centre. It is an index of equivocity, or of distance, rather than being one of lack. It matters little that one of these situations is contradicted or denied, for this happens only after its function has been exhausted, and never to such an extent that it eliminates the equivocity of the index and the distance between the situations which are evoked. In To Be Or Not To Be Lubitsch undoubtedly achieves a perfect handling of these complex indices. Sometimes in irresolvable images, for example, when a spectator leaves his seat as soon as the actor begins his monologue: is it because he has had enough, or because he has a rendezvous with the actor's wife? Sometimes in relation to the whole [ensemble] of the plot, which brings all the montage into play: the very slight difference in the gesture, but also the enormity of the distance between two situations, depending on whether the troupe of actors is playing the role of Germans in front of a theatre audience or, on the contrary, is 'doing' Germans in front of Germans who, consequently, seem to be playing their own role. A question of life or death: the distance between the situations is proportionate to the extent to which the characters know that all hangs on very small differences in behaviour.
In any case, in the small form, we deduce the situation, or the situations, from the action. This form seems to be less expensive in principle, more economical. Thus Chaplin explains that he has kept the light and shadow reflected from the train on a face because he did not have a real French train to show directly. . . . This ironical remark is important, because it raises a general problem: the effect that B movies or low budget films had on the inventions of the image in the cinema. Economic constraints undoubtedly gave rise to flashes of inspiration and images dreamed up with a view to economy could have universal repercussions. There were to be many examples of this in neo-realism and in the new wave, but it applies to all periods,
￼Action to situation 163
and we can often see the B movie as an active centre of experimentation and creation. Nevertheless, the 'small form' does not necessarily have its origin and certainly does not find its full expression, in low budget films. It finds as many factors of expression in cinemascope, in colour, in lavish staging and in sets as the large form itself. Although we call it the small form, this is in itself inadequate: we do so merely to contrast the two forms of the action-image - SAS' and ASA'. In other words, to contrast the univocal large organism which embraces the organs and functions to the actions and organs which are gradually formed in an equivocal organisation.
It is, therefore, easy to work out which genres or states of genre correspond to the two formulas of the action-image and are inspired by them. What we have just seen is the comedy of manners of the small form ASA, considered as distinct from the psycho-social film of the large form SAS. But an analogous distinction or opposition is applicable in the most varied areas. Let us first of all return to the great SAS historical film, the film of monumental and antiquarian history. To this is opposed a type of film which is no less historical - an ASA film - which has aptly been called the 'costume film'. In this case the costume, the dress and even the fabrics function as modes of behaviour or 'habitus' and are indices of a situation which they disclose. This is quite different from the historical film where - as we have seen - the fabrics and costumes have great importance, but only in so far as they are integrated into a monumental and antiquarian conception. Here it is a modist or modellist conception, as though the dressmaker, the designer had taken the place of the architect and the antiquarian. In the costume film, as in the comedy of manners, the 'habitus' are inseparable from the outfits [habits], the actions are inseparable from the state of the costumes which constitute their form, and the situation which follows from this is inseparable from the fabrics and hangings. It is not surprising that Lubitsch in his earliest work - his German Expressionist period - should have made costume films (Anne Boleyn, Madame Dubarry and, above all, the oriental fantasy Sumurun) which already bore the imprint of his particular genius - the fabrics, the outfits, the states of dress whose texture,mattorluminous,he3wasabletoreproduce intheimageand which functioned as indices.
In the field of the documentary, the English school of the 1930s was opposed to the great Flaherty-documentary. Grierson and Rotha criticised Flaherty for his social and political indifference. Instead of starting from an encompasser, from a milieu from which the behaviour of men was naturally deduced, it was necessary to start
￼164 10 The action-image
from modes of behaviour, to infer from them the social situation which was not given as an in-itself, but which itself referred back to struggles and modes of behaviour which were always in action or in transformation. The 'habitus' thus indicated differences of civilisation, and differences within a single civilisation. Thus one moved from the behaviour to the situation in such a way that, from the one to the other, there was the possibility of a 'creative interpretation of reality'. This movement would be taken up again in other conditions by direct cinema and cinema-verite.
There is also the detective film, as distinct from the crime film. There may, of course, be detectives in the crime film, just as there may not be any in the detective film. What distinguishes the two types is that in the crime formula - SAS - one moves from the situation, or the milieu, towards actions which are duels, while in the detective formula - ASA - one moves from blind actions, as indices, to obscure situations which vary entirely or which fluctuate completely, depending on a minuscule variation in the index. The novelist Hammett's formula expresses this type of image exactly: 'putting a spanner in the works'. It is the blind gesture which shatters the completely black situation, tears away the shreds of the situation. Some fine films resulted from this: Hawks' The Big Sleep, Huston's The Maltese Falcon (the same directors who also excelled themselves in the large form of the crime film). Lang perhaps achieved the masterpiece of the genre in Beyond aReasonable Doubt: the hero, in the context of a campaign against a judicial error, fabricates false indices which accuse him of a crime, but since the evidence of the fabrication has disappeared, he finds himself in the situation of being arrested and sentenced. However, on the verge of being reprieved, during afinal visit by his fiancee, he gives himself away, and lets slip an index which makes her realise that he is guilty, and has genuinely committed murder. The fabrication of the false indices was a way of obliterating the true ones, but resulted, by a roundabout route, in the same situation as the true ones. No other film surrenders itself to this dance of indices with such mobility and convertibility of opposed distant situations.
2 The Western in Hawks: functionalism
Finally, the Western poses the same problem in particularly fertile conditions. We have seen that the large 'respiration' form was not content with the epic but, throughout its varieties, sustained an
￼The Western in Hawks 165
encompassing milieu, a global situation, which would give rise to an action, capable in its turn of modifying the situation from within. This great organic representation - for example in Ford - had precise characteristics: it comprised one or several fundamental groups, each well-defined, homogeneous, with its locations, its interiors, its customs (thus, the five groups in Wagonmaster); it also comprised a makeshift group, thrown together by chance or circumstance, more heterogeneous, incongruous, but functional. Finally, there was abig gap between the situation and the action to be undertaken, but this gap only existed to be filled. The hero had to actualise the power which made him equal to the situation, he had to become capable of the action, and became so gradually in so far as he represented the 'good' fundamental group and found the necessary support in the makeshift group (the alcoholic doctor, the whore with a heart of gold, etc. proved to be effective). And it is remarkable that Hawks subscribes to this organic representation, but subjects it to such a treatment that it emerges profoundly affected, deformed. In its full expression, as at the start of Red River, where the couple outlined against the sky is equal to the whole of Nature, the image is too strong to be able to last. And, when it does last, it is in another mode: the image needs to become fluid, the horizon joins with the river, as much in Red River as in The Big Sky. We might say that in Hawks the earthly organic representation tends to empty itself, leaving nothing but almost abstract fluid functions which come to the forefront.
First of all, the locations lose the organic life which encompassed them, traversed them and situated them in a set: the purely functional prison in Rio Bravo does not even need to show us its prisoner; the church in El Dorado no longer bears witness to anything but an abandoned function; the town of Rio Lobo is reduced to 'a diagram, now only showing functions, a bloodless town condemned by the weight of a past'. At the same time, the fundamental group becomes very vague, and the only community which is still well-defined is the incongruous makeshift group (an alcoholic, an old man, a young boy . . .); it is a functional group which no longer has its foundation in the organic. It finds its motivations in a debt to be discharged, a mistake to be redeemed, a downhill slope into degradation to be climbed again, and its forces or means in the invention of an ingenious machine, rather than in the representation of a collectivity (the catapult-tree in The Big Sky, the final fireworks in Rio Bravo and, leaving Westerns, from the scientists' machine in Ball of Fire to the great invention in Land of the Pharaohs)* In Hawks, pure functionalism tends to replace the structure of the encompasser. The claustrophilia
￼166 10 The action-image
of certain of Hawks' films has often been noticed: notably Land of the Pharaohs, where the invention consists in locking the funeral chamber from the inside, but also in Rio Bravo, which could be called a 'chamber Western*. This is because in the obliteration of the encompasser, there is no longer (as in Ford) communication between an organically situated interior and an outside which surrounds it, giving it a living milieu which is a source of assistance as much as aggression. Here, on the contrary, the unexpected, the violent, the event, come from the interior whilst the exterior is rather the location of the customary or premeditated action, in a curious reversal of the outside and the inside.5 Everyone enters and passes through the room where the sheriff is having a bath, as though it were a public place (El Dorado). The external milieu loses its curvature and assumes the figure of a tangent from a point, or from a segment which functions as interiority. The outside and the inside thus become external to one another, they enter into a purely linear relationship, which makes possible a functional permutation of the opposites. Hence the constant mechanism of reversals in Hawks which operates quite openly, independently of a symbolic background, even when they do not just relate to the outside and the inside but, as in the comedies, concern all the binary relations. If the outside and the inside are pure functions the inside can assume the function of the outside. But the woman can also assumethe function of the man in the relationshipof seduction, and the man that of the woman (Bringing up Baby, I Wasa Male War Bride, and the female roles in Hawks' Westerns). The adults or old people have the functions of children, and the child a monstrous function of the mature adult (BallofFire, Gentlemen Prefer Blondes). The same mechanism can come into play between love and money, noble language and slang. As we shall see, these reversals, as functional permutations, form veritable Figures ensuring a trans- formation of the form.
Hawks surrenders himself to a topological deformation of the large form. This is why Hawks' films preserve a great 'respiration' (as Rivette calls it), although it has become fluid, expressing the continuity and permutation of functions more than the unity of an organic form.6 But, despite its debt to Hawks, the neo-Western takes another direction: it borrows the 'small form' directly, even on the big screen. The ellipse reigns and replaces the spiral and its projections. It is no longer a matter of the global or integral law SA (a big gap which only exists to be filled), but a differential law AS: the smallest distance, which exists only to be increased, to give rise to very distant or opposable situations. In the first place, the Indians no
￼The Western in Hawks 167
longer appear at the top of the hill outlined against the sky, but spring up from the tall grass, from which they were indistinguishable. The Indian almost blends into the rock behind which he waits (Martin Ritt's Hombre), and the cowboy has something mineral about him which makes him blend into the landscape (Anthony Mann's Man of the West).1 Violence becomes the principal impetus, and gains from this as much in intensity as in unexpectedness. In Boetticher's Seminole, people die from the blows of an invisibleadversary hidden in the swamps. Not only has the fundamental group disappeared in favour of increasingly incongruous and mixed makeshift groups but the latter, in proliferating, have lost the clear distinction which they still had in Hawks: there are so many relations and such complex alliances between men in the same group and those in different groups that they are scarcely distinguishable and their oppositions constantly shift (Peckinpah's Major Dundee and The Wild Bunch). The difference between the hunter and the hunted, but also between White Man and Indian, becomes smaller and smaller: in Mann's The Naked Spur, the bounty-hunter and his prey do not seem very different; and in Penn's Little Big Man, the hero is constantly white with the White Men, Indian with the Indians, crossing a minuscule frontier in both directions, at the prompting of actions which are barely distinguishable from one another. This is because the action can never be determined by and in a preceding situation - it is, on the contrary, the situation which flows progressively from the action - Boetticher used to say that his characters are not defined by a 'cause', but by what they do to defend it. And, when Godard analysed form in Anthony Mann, he extracted a formula ASA', which he opposed to the large form SAS': the mise-en-scene 'consisted in discovering atthe same timeasspecifying, while, in aclassicalWestern, the mise-en-scene consists in discovering, then in specifying'. But, if the situation itself depends on the action in this way, the action in its turn must necessarily be related to the moment of its birth, to the instant, the second, the smallest interval as the differential which serves as its impetus.
In the second place, this law of the slight difference is only valid in so far as it produces situations which are logically very distant. The situation of Little Big Man really changes entirely depending on whether it is impelled by the Indians or the White Man. And, if the instant is the differential of the action, at each of these instants the action can swing into a completely different or opposed situation. Nothing is ever won. Thus, failings, doubts, fear no longer have the same sense as they do in the organic representation: they are no
￼168 10 The action-image
longer the steps - even painful ones - which fill the gap, through which the hero rises to the demands of the global situation, actualises his own power and becomes capable of such a great action. For there is no longer any grandiose action at all, even if the hero has retained extraordinary technical qualities. At the limit, he is one of the 'losers', as Peckinpah presents them: 'they have no facade, they have not a single illusion left: thus they represent disinterested adventure, from which no advantage is to be gained except the pure satisfaction of remaining alive.' They have kept nothing of the American dream, they have only kept their lives, but at each critical instant, the situation to which their action gives rise can rebound against them, making them lose the one thing they have left. In short, the action- image has signs as indices, which are both indices of lack - illustrated by the brutal ellipses in the story - and indices of distance or equivocity - illustrated by the possibility and reality of sudden reversals of the situation.
It is not merely a case of hesitation between two situations which are distant or opposed, but simultaneous. The successive situations, each of which is already equivocal in itself, will form in turn with one another, and with the critical instants which give rise to them, a broken line whose path is unpredictable, although necessary and rigorous. This is as true of locations as of events. In Peckinpah, there is no longer a milieu, a West, but Wests: including Wests with camels, Wests with Chinamen, that is, totalities [ensembles} of locations, men and manners which 'change and are eliminated' in the same film.8 In Mann and also in Daves, there is a 'shorter route', which is not the straight line, but which brings together actions or parts, A and A', each one of which retains its independence, each one of which is a heterogeneous 9critical instant, 'a present sharpened to its own extremepoint'. Itislikeaknottedrope,twistingitselfateachtake,at each action, at each event. Thus contrary to the respiration-space of the organic form, a quite different space is formed: a skeleton-space, with missing intermediaries, heterogeneous elements which jump from one to the other, or which interconnect directly. It is no longer an ambient space, but a vectorial space, a vector-space, with temporal distances. It is no longer the encompassing stroke of a great contour, but the broken stroke of a line of the universe, across the holes. The vector is the sign of such a line. It is the genetic sign of the new action- image, whilst the index was the sign of its composition.
￼Small form and burlesque 169 3 The law of the small form and burlesque
We have seen how the classical genres of the cinema could, in a summary fashion, be assigned to one of the two forms of the action- image. There is one genre which seems to be exclusively devoted to the small form, to the extent of having created it, and of having served as the condition for the comedy of manners - the burlesque. In it the formula of the form AS is most fully developed: a very slight difference in the action, or between two actions, which brings out an infinite distance between two situations, and which exists only to bring out that distance. Let us take some famous examples from the Charlie Chaplin series: viewed from behind, Charlie, deserted by his wife, seems to be shaking with sobs, but as soon as he turns round we see that he is in fact shaking himself a cocktail. Similarly, in battle, Charlie scores a point for himself each time he fires a shot: but then an enemy bullet replies, and he subtracts a point. The important element, the burlesque process itself, consists in this: the action is filmed from the angle of the smallest difference from another action (firing a gun - playing a shot), but in this way it discloses the enormity of the distance between two situations (game of billiards - war). When Charlie hangs on to a sausage suspended in a butcher's shop, he draws an analogy which equally evokes all the distance which separates a butcher's shop from a tramcar. This is what we find in most diversions of everyday objects: a very slight difference introduced into the object will induce opposable functions or opposed situations. This is the potentiality of tools: and even when Charlie comes face to face with machines, he clings to the idea of a huge tool which is automatically converted into the opposing situation. Hence Chaplin's humanism, demonstrating that a 'mere nothing' is enough to set the machine against man, to make it an instrument of imprisonment, immobilisation, frustration and even torture, at the level of the most elementary needs (the two great machines of Modern Times confront man's simple need to eat by setting up insuperable difficulties). In the Charlie series, we do not merely discover the laws of the small form, rather we grasp them at their source: confusion, identification with the milieu (Charlie in the sand, Charlie-statue, Charlie-tree, re-incarnating the prophecy of Macbeth . . :); the slight difference which makes the situation fluctuate, like the personality split of a pivotal character in Gold Rush or City Lights; the instant as critical moment of opposable situations. Charlie caught in the instant, moving from one instant to the next, each requiring his full powers of improvisation; finally, the line of the
￼170 10 The action-image
universe which he describes in this way, the broken stroke which makes itself felt even in the angular swerves of his walk, which only finally brings its segments and directions together by aligning them on the long road, where Charlie, seen from the rear, plunges between telegraph poles and leafless trees; or else zigzagging along the frontier between America, where the police are on the lookout for him, and Mexico, where bandits are waiting for him. The sign of the burlesque is thus constituted by the whole play of indices and vectors; the 'ellipse' in both senses.
Indeed, the law of the index - the slight difference in the action which brings out an infinite distance between two situations - seems to be omnipresent in burlesquein general. Harold Lloyd, particularly, develops a variant which moves the process on from the action-image to the pure perception-image. A first perception is given to us, for example Harold in a luxurious car, brought to a standstill at a stop sign; then a second perception appears when the car starts up, revealing Harold on a poor man's bicycle. He had only been framed in the car window, and the infinitely small difference between the two perceptions brings home to us all the more fully the infinite distance between the two situations of rich-poor. Similarly in an excellent scene from Safety Last, a first perception gives us a seated, hunched-up man, bars, a dangling slip-knot, a woman crying, a pleading priest; while the second perception reveals that it is only a goodbye on a station platform, where each element has its proper place.
If we want to define Chaplin's originality, to find what gave him an incomparable place in the burlesque, we must look elsewhere. For Chaplin knew how to select gestures which were close to each other and corresponding situations which were far apart, so as to make their relationship produce a particularly intense emotion at the same time as laughter, and to redouble the laughter through this emotion. If a slight difference in the action induces very distant or opposable situations - S and S' - and makes them alternate, one of these situations will be 'really' touching, horrific and tragic (and not merely through an optical illusion, as in Harold Lloyd). In the previous example of Shoulder Arms, war is the real and present situation, whereas the game of billiards recedes to infinity. However it does not recede enough to stop us laughing: conversely, our laughter does not stand in the way of emotion before the image of war which imposes itself and develops, even into the flooded trenches. In short, the infinite distance between S' and S" (the war and the game of billiards) moves us all the more as the convergence of the two actions, the slight
￼Small form and burlesque 171
difference in the action makes us laugh more. Because Chaplin knows how to invent the minimum difference between two well-chosen actions, he is also able to create the maximum distance between the corresponding situations, the one achieving emotion, the other reaching pure comedy. It is a laughter-emotion circuit, in which the one refers to the slight difference, the other to the great distance, without the one obliterating or diminishing the other, but both interchanging with one another, triggering each other off again. No case can be made for a tragic Chaplin. There is certainly no case for saying that we laugh, whereas we should cry. Chaplin's genius lies in doing both together, making us laugh as much as moving us. In City Lights the blind girl and Charlie do not divide up the roles between them. In the unravelling scene - between the unseeing action which tends to eradicate any difference between one thread and another, and the visible situation, which is completely transformed depending on whether a Charlie, assumed to be rich, is holding the skein, or a poverty-stricken Charlie is losing his rag of clothing - the two characters are on the same circuit, both of them comic and moving.
Chaplin's last films both discover sound and put Charlie to death (it is not merely that Verdoux becomes Charlie when he goes to his death, but the dictator who mounts the rostrum merges into Charlie ascending the scaffold). Here the same principle seems to gain a new power. Bazin insisted that The Great Dictator would not have been possible had Hitler not, in reality, appropriated and stolen Charlie's moustache.10 The difference between the littleJewish barber and the dictator is as slight as that between their two moustaches. However, two situations arise from this which are infinitely far apart, as opposable as those of the victim and the executioner. Likewise in Monsieur Verdoux the difference between the two aspects or modes of behaviour of the same man - the woman-killer and the loving husband of an invalid - is so slender that his wife needs all her intuition to sense when he has 'changed'. As Mireille Latil says, it was not through incapacity, but by a stroke of fortune that Chaplin 'scarcely varied the appearance of the character, and never changed his style of acting' in portraying Verdoux's two aspects." A great distance between the opposing situations emerges from the slight, evanescent difference, illustrated by the frenetic comings and goings between the false domiciles and the true home. In these two films, does Chaplin want to tell us that there is a Hitler, a potential murderer in each of us? And that it is only situations which make us good or evil, victims or executioners, capable of loving or destroying? Whether or not such ideas are profound or platitudinous, this does
￼172 10 The action-image
not seem consistent with Chaplin's way of looking at things, except in a very secondary way. For what is still more important than the two opposing situations of good and evil are the underlying discourses, which are expressed as such at the end of these films. For this very reason these films proceed simultaneously to a progressive conquest of the talkie, and to a progressive elimination of Charlie. Whatthediscoursessay,inTheGreatDictatorandMonsieur Verdoux, is that Society puts itself in the situation of making any powerful man into a bloody dictator, any businessman a murderer, literally a murderer, because it gives us too much incentive to be evil, instead of giving rise to situations where freedom and humanity would be bound up with our interest or our raison d'etre. This is an idea close to Rousseau, and to a Rousseau whose social analysis was fundamentally realist.Consequently weseewhathaschangedinChaplin'slastfilms. Discourse brings them a completely new dimension, and constitutes 'discursive' images.
We are no longer merely dealing with two opposing situations which appear to be born out of minuscule differences between actions, between men, or in the same man. It is a case of two states of society, two opposable Societies, one of which makes the slight difference between men into the instrument of an infinite distance between situations (tyranny), and the other which would make the slight difference between men the variable of a great situation of community and communality (Democracy).12 In the series of silent Charlie films, Chaplin could only reach this theme through idyllic or dream images (the great dream in Easy Street or the idyllic image of Modern Times). But it is the talkie, in the form of discourse, which was to give this theme a realist force. We might say that Chaplin is at once one of the directors who most mistrusted the talkie, and one of those who made a radical, original use of it. Chaplin uses it to introduce the Figure of discourse into the cinema, thus transforming the initial problems of the action-image. Hence the particular importance of The Great Dictator, where the final discourse (whatever its intrinsic value) is identified with all human language, represents everything that man can say, in comparison with the false language of nonsense and terror, sound and fury that Chaplin has the genius to invent and put into the mouth of the tyrant. The small burlesque form lacked nothing; but, in his last films, Chaplin pushes it to alimit which links it up again with a large form which no longer needs the burlesque, but which retains its power and its signs. Indeed, it is always the slight difference which appears in two incommensurable or opposing situations. (This gives rise to Limelight's incisive
￼Small form and burlesque 173
question: what is this 'mere nothing', this fracture of age, this slight difference of wear and tear which turns an excellent clown's act into a lamentable spectacle?) But, in the last films, and again particularly in Limelight, the slight differences between men, or in the same man, become states of life on their own account, even at the lowest level, variations of a vital force that the clown can mimic, while the opposable situations become two states of society, the one pitiless and life-denying; the other, which the dying clown can still foresee and communicate to the cured woman. And it is again in Limelight that everything is conveyed through the introduction of the discourse, in a Shakespearian mode, the most Shakespearian of Chaplin's three discourses. Chaplin was to recall this when A King in New York launches into Hamlet's discourse, which is like the reverse or diametrical opposite of American society (democracy has become 'kingdom' since America has become a society of propaganda and police).
Buster Keaton's position, however, is very different. Keaton's paradox is that of inserting burlesque directly into a large form. While it is true that the burlesque belongs essentially to the small form, there is in Keaton something which is incomparable, even with Chaplin who only conquers the large form through the figure of discourse and the relative effacement of the burlesque character. Buster Keaton's profound originality lies in giving the large form a burlesque content which it appeared to challenge, in having reconciled - against all the odds - the burlesque and the large form. The hero is like a minuscule dot encompassed by an immense and catastrophic milieu, in a transformation-spaceespacaransformation]:vast, changing landscapes and deformable geometric structures, rapids and waterfalls, a great ship drifting on the seas, a town swept by the cyclone, a bridge collapsing like a flattened parallelogram. . . . Keaton's gaze, as Benayoun describes it, seen full on or in profile, sometimes sees everything, in a periscope position, sometimes sees far, in a sentinel's position.13 It is a gaze made for great internal or external spaces. At the same time, a type of images which are unexpected in the burlesque rise up before our very eyes. For example, the opening sequence of Our Hospitality, with the night, the thunderstorm, the lightning, the double murder and the terrified woman: pure Griffith. Alst> the cyclone in Steamboat Bill Junior, the diver's suffocation at the bottom of the sea in The Navigator, the crushing of the train and the flood in The General, the terrible boxing match in Battling Butler. Occasionally it is, in particular, an element
￼174 10 The action-image
of the image: the sabre-blade about to be thrust into an enemy's back, in The General, or the knife which The Cameraman slips into the hand of a Chinese demonstrator. Take, for example, the boxing match, since all burlesques have used this theme. Charlie Chaplin's matches correspond well to the law of the slight difference: a ballet-match, or domestic-match. But in Battling Butler there are three contests: a match which appears to be genuine, perceived in all its violence; a training session, treated in a traditional burlesque fashion, with Keaton like an excited child leaping around, then being threatened by the father-trainer; then finally the settling of scores between Keaton and the champion in all its ugliness: the bodies tossed about, the distortion and crumpling of flesh under the blows, the hatred which appears on their faces. It is one of the greatest indictments of boxing. One of Keaton's anecdotes thus becomes clearer: wanting to include a flood, he ran up against the producer's objection that things like that do not makepeople laugh. He replied that Chaplin had got laughs out of the First World War, but the producer held fast and only accepted a cyclone (because he did not seem to have realised the number of deaths which cyclones can cause).14 This producer's intuition was correct: for if Chaplin could get laughs from the First World War, it is because, as we have seen, he relates the terrible situation to a slight difference which is itself ludicrous. Keaton, however, gives himself a scene or situation outside the burlesque, a limit-image: in the cyclone as much as in the fight. It is no longer a case of a slight difference which brings out the opposable situations, it is a case of a large gap between the given situation and the anticipated comic action (law of the large form). How will the gap be breached, not just so that the comic action is 'incidentally' produced, but so that it dominates and
carries along the situation in its entirety, and coincides with it? One would not say of Keaton, any more than of Chaplin, that he is tragic. But the problem is quite different in both directors.
What is unique to Buster Keaton is the way in which he raises the burlesque directly to the large form. However, he uses several methods. The first is what David Robinson calls the 'trajectory gag', which brings into play a whole art of rapid montage: thus as early as in The Three Ages the hero (as ancient Roman) escapes from a dungeon, seizes a shield, runs up a staircase, grabs a lance, jumps on to a horse, and standing up leaps through a high window, pushes aside two pillars,bringingtheceilingdown,carriesoffthegirl,slidesalong the lance and jumps into a litter which is just being carried off. Or else the modern hero leaps from the top of one house to another, but falls, saving himself by grabbing hold of a canopy, tumbles down a pipe
￼Small form and burlesque 175
which comes loose, projecting him down two storeys into a fire station, where he slides down the pole to jump on to the back of the fire-engine, which is about to set off. In other burlesques, including those of Chaplin, there are very fast chases and races, with continuity in the variety, but Buster Keaton is perhaps alone in carrying out pure continuous trajectories. The fastest such trajectory is achieved in The Cameraman, where the girl telephones the hero, who rushes into New York and is already at her place when she puts the receiver down. Or in Sherlock Junior where, without montage, in a single shot, Keaton gets on to the roof of the train through a trap door, leaps from one carriage to the next, grabs the cord of a water tank that we saw at the start, is carried down on to the track by the torrent of water which he unleashes, and runs off into the distance, while two men arrive on the scene and get drenched. Or, yet again, the trajectory gag is achieved by a change of shot, the actor remaining immobile: thus the famous dream-sequence in Sherlock Junior, where cutting gives us successively the garden, the street, the precipice, the sand-dune, the reef washed by the sea, the snowy plain, and finally the garden once again (likewise the passage through a change of scenery into a stationary car).15
Another method might be called the machine gag. Keaton's biographers and commentators have emphasised his liking for machines, and his affinity in this respect with Dadaism rather than Surrealism: the house-machine, the ship-machine, the train-machine, the cinema-machine. . . . Machines and not tools: this is the first important aspect of his difference from Chaplin, who advances by means of tools, and isopposed tothe machine. But, in the second place, Keaton makes machines his most precious ally because his character invents them and becomes part of them, machines 'without a mother' like those of Picabia. They may get out of control, become absurd, or be absurd from the start, complicate the straightforward, but they never cease to serve a secret higher finality which is at the heart of Keaton's work. The model house in One Week, whose parts have been put together in disorder and which becomes a maelstrom; The Scarecrow, where the single-roomed house 'without a mother' muddles each potential room with another, each cogwheel with another, stove and gramophone, bath and couch, bed and organ. These are the house-machines which Keaton, the Dadaist architect par excellence, designs. But; in the third place, they themselves lead us to the question; what is this finality of the absurd machine, this distinctive form of nonsense in Keaton? They are both geometrical structures and physical causalities. But, in the whole of Keaton's
￼176 10 The action-image
work, their particularity is that they are geometrical structures with a 'minoring' function, or physical causalities with a 'recurrent' function.
In The Navigator the machine is not merely the great liner by itself: it is the liner apprehended in a 'minoring' function, in which each of its elements, designed for hundreds of people, comes to be adapted to a single destitute couple. The limit, the limit-image is thus the object of a series which does not set out to breach it, or even to reach it, but to attract it, to polarise it. By which system can a little egg be cooked in a huge pot? In Keaton, the machine isnot defined by immensity. It implies immensity, but in inventing the 'minoring' function which transforms it, by virtue of an ingenious system which is itself machinic, based on the mass of pulleys, wires and levers.16 Likewise, in The General, one should not just think that the girl who feeds the train's boiler with little pieces of wood is behaving in a clumsy and inept way. This is of course true, but she also brings to realisation Keaton's dream of taking the biggest machine in the world and making it work with the tiniest elements, thus converting it for the use of each one of us, making it the property of everyone. Keaton sometimes passes directly from the great, real machine to its reproduction as toy, for example, at the end of The Blacksmith. Go
West effects very varied 'minorations'; from the minusculerevolver to the little calf who has the task of rounding up the vast herd. This is the finality of the machine itself: it does not just comprise its main parts and mechanisms; it comprises its conversion into miniature, its conversion to the miniature, the mechanism of a transformation which adapts it to a solitary man, to a lost couple, beyond skills and specialisations. This must form part of the machine: in this respect we cannot be certain that Keaton lacks a political vision that is, on the contrary, present in Chaplin. There are rather two very different 'socialist' visions, the one communist-humanist in Chaplin, the other anarchistic-machinic in Keaton (rather like Illich, who was to lay claim to the right to use, or the 'minoration' of big machines).
These 'minorations' can only take place through the processes of physical causality, which pass through detours, extensions, indirect paths, liaisons between heterogeneous elements, providing the absurd element which is indispensableto the machine. Already in the 'Malec' series, The High Sign puts forward a bizarre abridgement of the causal series: a shooting machine in which the hero presses his foot on a hidden lever, so that a system of wires and pulleys brings down a bone which a dog tries to reach by pulling a cord so that the bell on the target rings (a cat is enough to throw the mechanism out of
￼Small form and burlesque 177
gear). We are reminded of the drawings of Rube Goldberg - also Dadaist - the prodigious causal series where 'posting a letter', for example, passes through a long succession of disparatemechanisms, each engaging with the others, beginning with a boot which sends a rugby ball into a tub, and, passing through interlocking mechanisms, finishes by unravelling before the sender's eyes a screen on which is written You Sap Mail that Letter. Each element of the series is such that it has no function, no relationship to the goal, but acquires one in relation to another element which itself has no function or relation. . . .These causalities operate through a series of disconnec- tions: like Keaton's, some of Tinguely's machines string together several structures, each including an element which is not functional but which becomes so in the one that follows (the grandmother who pushes the pedals in the car does not make the vehiclemove forward, but triggers off an apparatus for sawing wood . . .). These recurrent causalities make possible the appropriation of large geometrical structures and the development of great trajectories. A structure is the sketch of a trajectory, but a trajectory is no less the outline of a machine. Each trajectory itself constitutes a machine, in which man is a cog between the different elements: like the mechanic seated on the driving shaft of the locomotive which draws his motionless body into a series of arcs of a circle. The two essential forms of the gag in Keaton the trajectory-gag and the machine-gag-are two aspects of a same reality, a machine which produces man 'without a mother', or the
