
1 The two poles of the face: power and quality
The affection-image is the close-up, and the close-up is the face. . . .
Eisenstein suggested that the close-up was not merely one type of image among others, but gave an affective reading of the whole film. This is true of the affection-image: it is both a type of image and a component of all images. But that is not all there is to it. In what sense is the close-up identical to the whole affection-image? And why would the face be identical to the close-up, since the latter merely seems to carry out a magnification of the face, and also of many other things? And how can we extract poles which can guide us in the analysis of the affection-image from the magnified face?
Let us start from an example which is not a face: a clock which is presented to us in close-up several times. Such an image does indeed have two poles. On the one hand it has hands moved by micro- movements, at least virtual ones, even if we are only shown it once, or several times at long intervals: the hands necessarily form part of an intensive series which marks an ascent towards . . . or tends towards a critical instant, prepares a paroxysm. On the other hand it has a face as receptive immobile surface, receptive plate of inscription, impassive suspense: it is a reflecting and reflected unity.
The Bergsonian definition of the affect rested on these two very characteristics: a motor tendency on a sensitive nerve. In other words, a series of micro-movements on an immobilised plate of nerve. When a part of the body has had to sacrifice most of its motoricity in order to become the support for organs of reception, the principal feature of these will now only be tendencies to movement or micro-movements which are capable of entering into intensive series, for a single organ or from one organ to the other. The moving body has lost its movement of extension, and movement has become movement of expression. It is this combination of a reflecting, immobile unity and of intensive expressive movements which constitutes the affect. But is this not the same as a Face itself? The face is this organ-carrying plate of nerves which has sacrificed most of its global mobility and which gathers or expresses in a free way all kinds of tiny local movements which the rest of the body
￼88 6 The affection-image
usually keeps hidden. Each time we discover these two poles in something - reflecting surface and intensive micro-movements - we can say that this thing has been treated as a face [m<zg?]: it has been 'envisaged' or rather 'faceified' [visageifiee], and in turn it stares at us [devtsage], it looks at u s . . . even if it does not resemble a face. Hence the close-up of the clock. As for the face itself, we will not say that the close-up deals with [traite] it or subjects it to some kind of treatment: there is no close-up of the face, the face is in itself close-up, the close- up is by itself face and both are affect, affection-image.
In painting, the techniques of the portrait have accustomed us to these two poles of the face. Sometimes painting grasps the face as an outline, by an encircling line which traces the nose, the mouth, the edge of the eyelids, and even the beard and the cap: it is a surface of faceification [visageification]. Sometimes, however, it works through dispersed features taken globally; fragmentary and broken lines which indicate here the quivering of the lips, there the brillianceof a look, and which involve a content which to a greater or lesser extent rebels against the outline: these are the traits of faceicity [visageite].' And it is no accident that the affect appeared from these two points of view in the great conceptions of the Passions which run through both philosophy and painting: what Descartes and Le Brun call admiration, which marks a minimum of movement for a maximum of unity, reflecting and reflected on the face; and what is called desire, inseparable from the little solicitations or impulsions which make up an intensive series expressed by the face. It matters little that some consider admiration to be the origin of the passions precisely because it is the degree zero of movement, whilst others put desire first, or restlessness, because immobility itself presupposes the reciprocal neutralisation of the corresponding micro-movements. Rather than an exclusive origin, it is a matter of two poles, sometimes one prevailing over the other and appearing almost pure, sometimes the two being mixed in one direction or the other.
There are two sorts of questions which we can put to a face, depending on the circumstances: what are you thinking about? Or, what is bothering you, what is the matter, what do you sense or feel? Sometimes the face thinks about something, is fixed on to an object, and this is the sense of admiration or astonishment that the English word wonder has preserved. In so far as it thinksabout something, the face has valueabove all through its surroundingoutline, itsreflecting unity which raises allthe parts to itself. Sometimes, on the contrary, it
experiences or feels something, and has value through the intensive series that its parts successively traverse as far as paroxysm, each part
￼Two poles of the face 89
taking on a kind of momentary independence. We can already recognise in this the two types of close-up, one of which was the hallmark of Griffith, and the other of Eisenstein. There are famous Griffith close-ups in which everything is organised for the pure and soft outline of a feminine face (notably the iris procedure): a young woman thinks about her husband in Enoch Arden. But, in Eisenstein's The General Line, the handsome face of the priest is dissolved, giving way to a cheating look which links up with the narrow back of the head and the fleshy earlobe: it is as if the traits of faceity were escaping the outline, and testifying to the priest's ressentiment.
It should not be thought that the first pole is reserved for the tender emotions and the second for dark passions. It will be recalled, for example, how Descartes considers contempt to be a special case of 'admiration'.2 On the one hand there are reflecting acts of spitefulness, reflected terrors and despairs, even, and above all, in Griffith's or Stroheim's young women. On the other hand there are the intensive series of love or tenderness. Moreover, each aspect brings together very different states of the face. The aspect of wonder can affect an impassive face which is pursuing an impenetrable or criminal thought: but it can equally take possession of a juvenileor curious face, so animated by little movements that these dissolve and are neutralised (thus in Sternberg, The Scarlet Empress - a girl again - looks in all directions and is surprised by everything when the Russian envoys take her away). And the other aspect has no less variety depending on the series considered.
Where, therefore, is the criterion of distinction? In fact, we find ourselves before an intensive face each time that the traits break free from the outline, begin to work on their own account, and form an autonomous series which tends toward a limit or crosses a threshold: ascending series of anger, or, as Eisenstein says, 'the rising line of annoyance' (Battleship Potemkiri). This is why this serial aspect is best embodied by several simultaneous or successive faces, although a single face can suffice if it puts its different organs or features into series. Here the intensive series discloses its function, which is to pass from one quality to another, to emerge on to a new quality. To produce a new quality, to carry out a qualitative leap, this is what Eisenstein claims for the close-up: from the priest-man of God to the priest-exploiter of peasants; from the anger of the sailors to the revolutionary explosion; from the stone to the scream, as in the three postures of the marble lions ('and the stones have roared').
On the other hand, we are before a reflexive or reflecting face as long as the features remain grouped under the domination of a
￼90 6 The affection-image
thought which is fixed or terrible, but immutable and without becoming, in a way eternal. In Griffith's Broken Blossoms, the martyred girl nevertheless retains a petrified face, which, even in death still seems to reflect and ask why, whilst the Chinese lover, for his part, preserves on his face the stupor of opium and the reflection of Buddha. Admittedly, this case of the reflecting face seems less well determined than the other, for this relationship between a face and what it is thinking about is often arbitrary. We can only know that Griffith's young woman is thinking about her husband because we see the image of the husband immediately afterwards: we had to wait and the link seems to be merely associative. So it can be safer to reverse the order, and to begin with a close-up of the object which will inform us of the imminent thought of the face: in Pabst's Lulu the close-up of the knife prepares us for the terrible thought of Jack the Ripper (or in Clouzot's The Murderer Lives at Number 21 the whirling groups of three objects make us understand that the heroine is thinking of the figure 3 as key to the mystery). However, we have not yet reached the most profound aspect of the reflection-face. Mental reflection is undoubtedly the process by which one thinks of something. But it is cinematographically accompanied by a more radical reflection expressing a pure quality, which is common to several different things (the object which carries it, the body which submits to it, the idea which represents it, the face which has this idea. . .). The reflecting faces of young women in Griffith can express white, but it is also the white of a snowflake caught on an eye- lash, the spiritual white of an internal innocence, the dissolved white of a moral degradation, the hostile and searing white of the iceberg where the heroine will wander (Orphans of the Storm). In Women in Love Ken Russell was able to play with the quality common to a hardened face, an internal frigidity, a funereal glacier. In short, the reflecting face is not content to think about something. Just as the intensive face expresses a pure Power - that is to say, is defined by a series which carries us from one quality to another - the reflexive face expresses a pure Quality, that is to say a 'something' common to several objects of different kinds. We can therefore draw up a table of the two poles:
Sensible nerve Immobile receptive plate Faceifying outline Reflecting unity Wonder
Motor tendency Micro-movements of expression Characteristics of faceicity Intensive series
Desire
￼Griffith and Eisenstein
91
2
Griffith and Eisenstein
(admiration, surprise) Quality
Expression of a quality
common to several different things
(love-hate)
Power
Expression of a power which
passes from one quality to another
Pabst's Lulu shows the extent to which one goes from one pole to the other in a relatively short sequence: first the two faces, of Jack and of Lulu, are relaxed, smiling, dreamy, wondering? then Jack's face, above Lulu's shoulder, sees the knife and goes into an ascending series of terror ('the fear becomes a paroxysm. . . his pupils grow wider and wider. . . the mm gasps in terror. . .'); finally Jack s face relaxes, Jack accepts his destiny and now reflects death as a quality common to his killer's mask, the availabilityof the victim and the irresistible call of the instrument: 'the knife blade gleams. . .'.4
It is certainly true that in a given director one of the poles will prevail but it is always in a more complex way than one would at first think. Eisenstein writes in a famous text: 'It is the kettle which began. . . . " (You will recognize here, he says, a phrase from Dickens, but also one of Griffith's close-ups, the kettle looks at us.)5 In this text, he analyses the difference between himself and Griffith from the point of view of the close-up or the affection-image. Hesays that Griffith's close-up is merely subjective, that is to say it is concerned with the spectator's conditions of vision, that it remains separated, and only has an associative or anticipatory role. Whilst his own, Eisenstein's, close-ups are faded, objective and dialectical, for they produce a new quality, they carry out a qualitative leap. We recognise immediately the duality of the reflexive face and the intensive face, and it is true that Griffith gave precedence to one, Eisenstein to the other. Nevertheless, Eisenstein's analysis is too hasty, or rather partial. For in his work there are also outline-faces, strong in thought: the Tsarina Anastasia, when she has a foreboding of death; Alexander Nevsky, the pensive hero par excellence. And most importantly, there are already intensive series in Griffith: sometimes on a single face, when, starting from amazement or from global bewilderment, annoyance or fear arise and assume different features (Hearts of the World, Broken Blossoms); sometimes even on several faces, when the close-ups of the combatants punctuate the whole of the battle (Birth of a Nation).
￼92 6 The affection-image
It is true that these different faces in Griffith do not follow one another immediately, but their close-ups alternate with long shots, according to a binary6structure which he favours (public-private, collective-individual). Inthissense,Eisenstein'sinnovationwasnot to have invented the intensive face, nor even to have constituted the intensive series with several faces, several close-ups; it was to have produced compact and continous intensive series, which go beyond all binary structures and exceed the duality of the collective and the individual. Rather, they attain a new reality which could be called Dividual, directly uniting an immense collective reflection with the particular emotions of each individual;in short expressing the unity of power and quality.
It appears that a director always gives pre-eminence to one of the two poles - reflecting face or intensive face - but also gives himself the means to get back to the other pole. We would like to consider under this head another pair, that of Expressionism and lyrical abstraction. Of course, Expressionism can be just as abstract as lyricism. But the route is not at all the same. Expressionism is essentially the intensive play of light with the opaque, with darkness [tenebres]. Their mixture is like the power which makes people fall into the black hole or ascend towards the light. This mixture constitutes a series, sometimes in an alternating form of streaks or lines, sometimes in the compact, ascending and descending form of all the degrees of shadow which have value as colours. The Expressionist
face concentrates the intensive series, in both forms which disturb its outline and deprive it of its features. In this way the face participates in the non-organic life of things as the primary pole of Expressionism. A striated, striped face, caught in a more or less fine net, catching the effects of a Venetian blind, of a fire, of foliage, of sun through trees. A vaporous, cloudy, smokey face, enveloped by a more or less dense veil. Attila's dark and furrowed head in Lang's Die Nibelungen. But at the maximumpoint of concentration or at the extreme limit of the series, we might say that the face issurrendered to the indivisiblelight or to the white quality, as to Kriemhilde's unshakeable reflection. It regains its firm outline and passes to the other pole; life of the mind or spiritual non-psychological life. The reddish reflections which accompanied the whole series of degrees of shadow are reunited, they form a halo around the face which has become phosphorescent,
scintillating, brilliant, a being of light. Brilliance emerges out of the shadows, we pass from intensification to reflection. This operation may still be that of the devil, in the infinitely melancholy form of a demon who reflects the gloom, in a circle of flames where the non-
￼Griffith and Eisenstein 93
organic life of things burns (the demon of Wegener's Golem or of Murnau's Faust). But it can be a divine operation when mind is reflected in itself, in the form of a Gretchen saved by a supreme sacrifice, ectoplasm or photogramme which would eternally consume itself in reaching the luminous internal life (in Murnau again, Ellen of Nosferatur even Indre of
Lyrical abstraction in Sternberg proceeds completely differently. Sternberg is no less Goethean than the Expressionists, but he reflects another aspect of Goethe. This is the other aspect of the theory of colours: light no longer has to do with darkness, but with the transparent, the translucent or the white. The book translated into French as Memoirs of a Shadow Showman [Souvenirs d'un montreur d'ombres] is really entitled Fun in a Chinese Laundry [Droleries dans une blanchisserie chinoise]. Everything happens between the light and the white. It isSternberg's geniusto havebrought to realisationGoethe's splendid formula: 'between transparency and white opacity there exists an infinite number of degrees of cloudiness [trouble]. . . . One could call white the fortuitously opaque flash of pure transparency.'7 This is because the white, for Sternberg, is primarily that which circumscribes a space corresponding to the luminous. And into this space is inserted a close-up face which reflects the light. Thus Sternberg begins from the reflexive or qualitativeface. In The Scarlet Empress, we first of all see the white wonder8 face of the young girl which inserts its outline in the narrow space delimited by a white wall and the white door which she closes again. But later, at the birth of her son, the face of the young woman is caught between the white of a voile curtain and the white of the pillow and the sheets where she is resting, until we seethe astonishing image, which seems to have come from video, where the face is now only a geometric incrustation of the voile. The white space itself is in turn circumscribed, redoubled by a veil or a net which is superimposed, and gives it a volume, or rather what one calls in oceanography (but also in painting) a shallow depth. Sternberg has a great practical knowledge of linens,tulles, muslins and laces: he draws from them all the resources of a white on white within which the face reflects the light. Claude Oilier has analysed, in relation to The Saga of Anatahan, this reduction of space by abstraction, this compression of the location by artificiality which defines a field of operation and leads us by elimination of the whole universe, to a pure woman's face.9 Between the white of the veil and the white of the background, the face holds itself up like a fish, and can lose its outline in giving way to a soft focus, a blurred shot ['bouge'], without losing anything of its reflecting power. One
￼94 6 The affection-image
reaches aquarium atmospheres, as in Borzage, another adherent of this lyrical abstraction. The nets and the voile curtains of Sternberg are therefore quite distinct from the expressionist veils and nets - as his soft focuses are from their chiaroscuro.
It is no longer the struggle of light with darkness, but light's adventure with white: this is Sternberg's anti-Expressionism. We should not conclude that Sternberg confines himself to pure quality, and to its reflecting aspect, and that he is unaware of powers or intensities. Oilier impressively demonstrates that the more white space is closed and exiguous, the more precarious and open to the virtualities of the outside it is. As is said in Shanghai Gesture, 'anything can happen at any moment'. Everything ispossible. . . .A knife cuts the net, a red-hot iron makes a hole in the veil, a dagger pierces the paper partition. The closed world will pass through the intensive series, depending on the rays, the people and the objects which penetrate it. The affect is made up of these two elements: the
firm qualification of a white space, but also the intense potentialisation of that which is going to happen there.
We can certainly not say that Sternberg is ignorant of shadows and the series of their degrees up to darkness. He simply begins from the other pole, or from pure reflection. As early as in The Docks of New York the smoke fumes are white opacities, whose shadows are only consequences. Thus very early on Sternberg has the idea of what he wants. Later, even in Macao where the veils, the nets and also the Chinese have passed into shadow, space remains determined and distributed by the white suits of the two protagonists. The point is that for Sternberg, darkness does not exist by itself: it merely marks the place where the light stops. And shadow is not a mixture, but merely a result, a consequence - a consequence that cannot be separated from its premises. What are these premises? It is transparent, translucent or white space that has just been defined. Such a space retains the power to reflect light, but it also gains another power which is that of refracting, by diverting the rays which cross it. The face which remains in this space thus reflects a part of the light, but refracts another part of it. From being reflexive, it becomes intensive. Here there is something unique in the history of the close-up. The classical close-up ensures a partial reflection in so far as the face looks in a direction different from that of the camera, and thus forces the spectator to rebound on the surface of the screen. We are also familiar
with very fine 'camera-looks', as in Bergman's Summer with Monika, which establish a total reflection and give the close-up a distance which is proper to it. But Sternberg seems to have been alone in
￼The affect as entity 95
doubling the partial reflection of a refraction, thanks to the translucent or white milieu that he was able to construct. Proust spoke of white veils 'whose super-imposition only refracts more richly the central captive ray which crosses them'. At the same time as the luminous rays manifest a deviation in space, the facethat is, the affection-image - is displaced, raised in the shallowdepth, darkened at the edges, and enters an intensive series depending on whether the figure slides towards the dark edge, or the edge slides towards the light figure. The close-ups of Shanghai Express form an extraordinary series of variations at the edges. From the point of view of a prehistory of colour it is the opposite of Expressionism. Instead of a light which emerges from degrees of shadow by accumulationof red and extraction of brilliance, we have a light which creates degrees of blue shadow and puts brillianceinto shadow (in Shanghai Gesture,the shadows affect the zone of the eyes in the face).10 Sternberg is able to obtain effects analogous to those of Expressionism, as in The Blue Angel; but this is by simulation, with completely different means, inasmuch as refraction is much closer to a form of Impressionism where shadow is always a consequence. This is not just a parody of Expressionism, but more often a form of rivalry, that is to say a production of the same effects by opposite principles.
3 The affect as entity
We have seen the two poles of the affect - power and quality - and how the face necessarily passes from one to the other depending on the particular case. What compromises the integrity of the close-up in this respect is the idea that it presents to us a partial object, detached from a set or torn away from a set of which it would form part. Psychoanalysis and linguistics both get something out of this view, the one because it believes that it has discovered in it a structure of the unconscious (castration)intheimage,theotherthatithasdiscovered in it a constitutive procedure of language (synecdoche, pars pro toto). When critics accept the idea of the partialobject, they see in the close- up the mark of a fragmentation or a cut, some saying that it has to be reconciled with the continuity of the film, others that it shows, on the contrary, an essential filmic discontinuity. But in fact, the close-up, the close-up of the face, has nothing to do with a partial object (except in one case that we will see later). As Balazs has already accurately
demonstrated, the close-up does not tear away its object from a set of which it would form part, of which it would be a part, but on the
￼96 6 The affection-image
contrary it abstracts it from allspatio-temporal co-ordinates, that is to say it raises it to the state of Entity. The close-up is not an enlargement and, if it implies a change of dimension, this is an absolute change: a mutation of movement which ceases to be translation in order to become expression.
The expression of an isolated face is a whole which isintelligible by itself. We have nothing to add to it by thought, nor have we anything to add to that which is of space or time. When a face that we have just seen in the middle of a crowd is detached from its surroundings, put into relief, it is as if we were suddenly face to face with it. Or furthermore if we have seen it before in a large room, we will no longer think of this when we scrutinise the face in close-up. For the expression of a face and the signification of this expression have no relation or connection with space. Faced with an isolated face, we do not perceive space. Our sensation of space is abolished. A dimension of another order is opened to us.11
This is what Epstein was suggesting when he said: this face of a fleeing coward, as soon as we see it in close-up, we see cowardice in person, the 'feeling-thing', the entity.12 If it is true that the cinematic image is always deterritorialised, there is therefore a very special deterritorialisation which is specific to the affection-image. And when Eisenstein criticised the others - Griffith or Dovzhenko - he \reproached them for having sometimes failed in their close-ups because they allowed them to have a connotation of the spatio- temporal co-ordinates of a place, of a moment, without attaining what he himself called the 'pathetic' which element is apprehended in the ecstasy or the affect. 13
What is curious is that Balazs denies to other close-ups what he has just accepted for the face: a hand, a part of the body or an object would remain irremediably in space, and would therefore become close-ups only as partial objects. This is to fail to recognise both the constancy of the close-up through its varietiesand the strength of any object from the point of view of expression. Firstly, there is a great variety of close-ups effaces: sometimes outline, sometimes feature; sometimes a single face and sometimes several;sometimes successively, sometimes simultaneously. They can include a background, notably in the case of depth of field. But, in all these cases, the close-up retains the same power to tear the image away from spatio-temporal co- ordinates in order to call forth the pure affect as the expressed. Even the place, which is still present in the background, loses its co-
￼The affect as entity 97
ordinates and becomes 'any space whatever' [espace quelconque] (which restricts Eisenstein's objection). A feature of faceicity [visageite] is no less a complete close-up than a whole face. It is merely another pole of the face, and there is as much intensity expressed by a feature as there is quality by the whole face. So there are no grounds for distinguishing close-ups and big close-ups or 'inserts', which would only show a part of the face. In many cases there is no more distinction between close-medium shots, two-shots, and close-ups. And why would a part of the body, chin, stomach or chest be more partial, more spatio-temporal and less expressive than an intensive feature of faceicity or a reflexive whole face? For
example, the series of fat kulaks in Eisenstein's The General Line. And why is expression not available to things? There are affects of things, the 'edge', the 'blade', or rather the 'point' of Jack the Ripper's knife, is no less an affect than the fear which overcomes his features and the resignation which finally seizes hold of the whole of his face. The Stoics showed that things themselves were bearers of ideal events which did not exactly coincide with their properties, their actions and reactions: the edge of a knife. . . .
The affect is the entity, that is Power or Quality. It is something expressed: the affect does not exist independently of something which expresses it, although it is completely distinct from it. What expresses it is a face, or a facial equivalent (a faceified object) or, as we will see later, even a proposition. We call the set of the expressed and its expression, of the affect and the face, 'icon'. There are therefore icons of feature and icons of outline, or rather every icon has these two poles: it is the sign of the bipolar composition of the affection- image. The affection-rimage is power or quality considered for themselves, as expresseds. It is clear that powers and qualities can also exist in a completely different way: as actualised, embodied in states of things. A state of things includes a determinate space-time, spatio- temporal co-ordinates, objects and people, real connections between all these givens. In a state of things which actualises them the quality becomes the 'quale' of an object, power becomes action or passion, affect becomes sensation, sentiment, emotion or even impulse [pulsion] in a person, the face becomes the character or mask of the
person (it is only from this point of view that there can be mendacious expressions). But now we are no longer in the domain of the affection- image, we have entered the domain of the action-image. The affection-image, for its part, is abstracted from the spatio-temporal co-ordinates which would relate it to a state of things, and abstracts the face from the person to which it belongs in the state of things.
￼98 6 The affection-image
C. S. Peirce, whose great importance for the classification of images and signs we have already noted, distinguished between two sorts of images which he called 'Firstness' and 'Secondness'.14 Secondness was wherever there were two by themselves: what is what it is in relation to a second. Everything which only exists by being opposed, by and in a duel, therefore belongs to secondness: exertion-resistance, action-reaction, excitation-response, situation-behaviour, individual- milieu. . . . It is the category of the Real, of the actual, of the existing, of the individuated. And the first figure of secondness is that in which power-qualities become 'forces', that is to say are actualised in particular states of things, determinatespace-times, geographical and historical milieux, collective agents or individual people. It is here that the action-image is born and developed. But however close these concrete mixtures may be, firstness is an entirely different category, which refers to another type of image with other signs. Peirce does not conceal the fact that firstness is difficult to define, because it is felt, rather than conceived: it concerns what is new in experience, what is fresh, fleeting and nevertheless eternal. Peirce gives, as we shall see, some very strange examples, but they all come down to this: these are qualities or powers considered for themselves, without reference to anything else, independently of any question of their actualisation. It is that which is as it is for itself and in itself. It is, for example, a 'red', as present in the proposition 'this is not red' as in 'this is red". If you like, it is an immediate and instantaneous consciousness, such as is implied by every real consciousness which is itself never immediate nor instantaneous. It is not a sensation, a feeling, an idea, but the quality of a possible sensation, feeling or idea. Firstness is thus the
category of the Possible: it gives a proper consistency to the possible, it expresses the possible without actualising it, whilst making it a complete mode. Now, this is exactly what the affection-image is: it is quality or power, it is potentiality considered for itself as expressed. The corresponding sign is therefore expression, not actualisation. Maine de Biran had already spoken of pure affections, unplaceable because they have no relation to a determinate space, present in the sole form of a 'there is . . .', because they have no relations to an ego [moi] (the pains of a hemiplegic, the floating images of falling asleep, the visions of madness).15 The affect is impersonal and is distinct from everyindividuatedstateofthings:itisnonethelesssingular,and can enter into singular combinations or conjunctions with other affects. The affect is indivisible and without parts; but the singular combinations that it forms with other affects form in turn an indivisible quality, which will only be divided by changing
￼The affect as entity 99
qualitatively (the 'dividual'). The affect is independent of all determinate space-time; but it is none the less created in a history which produces it as the expressed and the expression of a space or a time, of an epoch or a milieu (this is why the affect is the 'new' and new affects are ceaselessly created, notably by the work of art).16
In short, affects, quality-powers, can be grasped in two ways: either as actualisedin a state of things, or as expressed by a face, a face- equivalent or a 'proposition'. This is Peirce's secondness and firstness. Every set of images is made up of firstnesses, secondnesses and many other things besides. But affection-images, in the strict sense, only refer to firstness.
This is a phantasmal conception of the affect which has its risks: 'and when he was at the other side of the bridge the phantoms came to meethim. . .'.Ordinarily,threerolesofthefacearerecognisable:itis individuating (it distinguishes or characterises each person); it is socialising (it manifest a social role); it is relational or communicating (it ensures not only communication between two people, but also, in a single person, the internal agreement between his character and his role). Now the face, which effectively presents these aspects in the cinema as elsewhere, loses all three in the case of close-up. Bergman is undoubtedly the director who has been most insistent on the fundamental link which unites the cinema, the face and the close-up: 'Our work begins with the human face. . . . The possibility of drawing near to the human face is the primary originality and the distinctive quality of the cinema.'17 A character has abandoned his profession, renounced his social role; he is no longer able to, or no longer wants to communicate, is struck by an almost absolute muteness; he even loses his individuation, to the point where he takes on a strange resemblance to the other, a resemblance by default or by absence. Indeed, these functions of the face presuppose the reality of a state of things where people act and perceive. The affection-image makes them dissolve, disappear. We recognise one of Bergman's
scripts.
There is no close-up of the face. The close-up is the face, but the
face precisely in so far as it has destroyed its triple function -a nudity of the face much greater than that of the body, an inhumanity much greater than that of animals. The kiss already testifies to the integral unity of the face, and inspires in it the micro-movements that the rest of the body hides. But, more importantly, the close-up turns the face into a phantom, and the book of phantoms. The face is the vampire, and the letters are his bats, his means of expression. In The Communicants, 'while the pastor reads the letter, the woman in the
￼100 6 The affection-image
foreground speaks the sentences without writing them', and, in Autumn Sonata, 'the text of the letter is divided between the woman who writes it, her husband who gets to know about it, and the addressee who has not yet received it'.18 The faces converge, borrow their memories from each other and tend to become mixed up. It is fruitless to wonder, in Persona, if these are two people who resembled each other before, or who begin to resemble each other, or on the contrary a single person who splits in two. It is something else. The close-up has merely pushed the face to those regions where the principle of individuation ceases to hold sway. They are not identical because they resemble each other, but because they have lost individuation no less than socialisation and communication. This is the operation of the close-up. The close-up does not divide one individual, any more than it reunites two: it suspends individuation. Then the single and ravaged face unites a part of one to a part of the other. At this point it no longer reflects nor feels anything, but merely experiences a mute fear. It absorbs two beings, and absorbs them in the void. And in the void it is itself the photogramme which burns, with Fear as its only affect. The facial close-up is both the face and its effacement. Bergman has pushed the nihilism of the face the furthest, that is its relationship in fear to the void or the absence, the fear of the face confronted with its nothingness. In a whole section of his work Bergman reaches the extreme limit of the affection-image, he burns the icon, he consumes and extinguishes the face as certainly as Beckett.
Is this the inevitableroute upon which the close-up as entity has set us? The phantoms threaten us all the more as they do not come from the past. Kafka distinguished two equally modern technological pedigrees: on the one hand the means of communication-translation, which ensure our insertion and our conquests in space and time (boat, car, train, aeroplane. . .); on the other hand the means of communication-expression which summon up phantoms on our route and turn us off course towards affects which are unco- ordinated, outside co-ordinates (letters the telephone, the radio, all the imaginable 'gramophones' and cinematographs. . .). This was not a theory, but Kafka's daily experience: each time one writes a letter, a phantom consumes its kisses before it arrives, perhaps before it leaves, so that it is already necessary to write another one.19 But what can be done to stop the two correlative series leading to the worst, the one given up to movement which is increasingly military and policing, which drags puppet-characters into rigid social roles, into congealed characters, whilst the void ascends in the other series,
￼The affect as entity 101
affecting the surviving faces with a single and identical fear? This is already the case in Bergman's work even in its political aspects (The Shame, The Serpent's Egg) but also in the German school which extends and renews the project of such a cinema of fear. From this perspective Wenders attempts a transplantation and reconciliation of the two pedigrees: 'I'm afraid of being afraid.' In his work there is often an active series where the movements of translation are converted and interchanged - train, car, metro, aeroplane, boat -and constantly interfering, constantly intermingled, an affective series where one looks for and meets expressive phantoms, or one summons them up with printing, photography and cinema. The voyage of initiation Kings of the Road goes through the phantom machines of the old printing works and of the travelling cinema. The journey of Alice in the Cities is punctuated by polaroids, to the point where the images of the film are extinguished at the same rhythm, until the moment when the little girl says: 'Aren't you taking photos any more?' even if it means that the phantoms then take on another form.
Kafka suggested making mixtures, putting phantom machines on the apparatuses of translation: this was very new for the time, a telephone in a train, post-boxes on a boat, cinema in an aeroplane.20 Is this not also the whole history of the cinema: the camera on rails, on a bicycle, aerial, etc.? And this is what Wenders wants when he makes the two series interpenetrate in his first films. The affection-image and the action-image will be saved somehow or other, the one by the other. . . . But is there not yet another way in which the affection- image might save itself and push back its own limit (a way sketched in Wenders' American Friend)'? The affects would need to form singular, ambiguous combinations which were always recreated, in such a way that the related faces are turned away from each other just enough not to be dissolved and effaced. And movement in its turn would need to go beyond the states of things, to trace lines of flight, just enough to open up in space a dimension of another order favourable to these compositions of affects. This is the affection- image: it has as its limit the simple affect of fear and the effacement of faces in nothingness. But as its substance it has the compound affect of desire and of astonishment - which gives it life - andthe turningaside of faces in the open, in the flesh.21
