1 The two poles, objective and subjective
We have seen that perception was double, or rather had a double reference. It can be objective or subjective. But the difficulty lies in knowing how an objective perception-image and a subjective perception-image are presented in the cinema. What distinguishes them? It could be said that the subjective-image is the thing seen by someone 'qualified', or the set as it is seen by someone who forms part of that set. This reference of the image to the person who sees is marked by various factors. There is the sensory factor, in the famous example from Gance's La Roue, where the character whose eyes are damaged sees his pipe in soft focus. There is the active factor, when the dance or the festival are seen by someone taking part in it: as in a film by Epstein or L'Herbier. There is the affective factor, which makes the hero of Fellini's The White Sheikh be perceived by the woman who admires him as if he were swaying at the top of an enormous tree, while in fact he is see-sawing just above the ground. But, if it is easy to check the subjective character of the image, this is because we compare it with the modified, restored image, which is supposed to be objective: we will see the white sheikh come off his grotesque see-saw; we had seen the pipe and the injured man before we saw the pipe seen by the injured man. It is here that the difficulty begins.
We should be able to say, in fact, that the image is objective when the thing or the set are seen from the viewpoint of someone who remains external to that set. And this is a possible definition, but one which is purely nominal, negative, and provisional. For what is to tell us that what we initially think external to a set may not turn out to belong to it? Lewin's Pandoraand the Flying Dutchman opens with the long shot of a beach where groups are running towards a point; the beach is seen from a distance and from a height, through a telescope on the promontory of a house. But very quickly we learn that the house is inhabited, and the telescope used, by people who are very much part of the set under consideration: the beach, the point which attracts the groups, the event taking place there, the people mixed up in it. ... Has the image not become subjective, as in Lubitsch's example? And is it not the cinema's perpetual destiny to make us
￼72 f The perception-image
move from one of its poles to the other, that is, from an objective perception to a subjective perception, and vice versa? It is therefore our two initial definitions which are nominal, and merely nominal.
Jean Mitry noted the importance of one of the functions of the 'shot-reverse shot' complementarity: when it intersects with that other complementarity, 'observer-observed'. First of all we are shown someone watching, then what he sees. But we cannot even say that the first image is objective and the second subjective. For what is seen, in the first image, is already subjective, observing. And, in the second image, the observed may be shown for itself, no less than for the observing character. Furthermore, an extreme contraction of the shot-reverse shot may take place as in L'Herbier's El Dorado, where the distraught woman who sees in soft focus is herself seen in soft focus. Consequently, if the cinematographic perception-image constantly passes from the subjective to the objective, and vice versa, should we not ascribe to it a specific, diffuse, supple status, which may remain imperceptible, but which sometimes reveals itself in certain strikingcases? Very early on, the mobile camera anticipated characters, recaptured them, let them go or picked them up again. Very early too, in Expressionism, it filmed or followed a character from behind (Murnau's Tartuffe, Dupont's Vaudeville). Finally, the liberated camera performed 'tracking shots in a closed circuit' (Murnau's The Last Laugh) in which it no longer confines itself to following characters, but moves amongst them. In response to these developments, Mitry put forward the notion of the generalised semi- subjective image, in order to designate this 'being-with' of the camera: it no longer mingles with the character, nor is it outside: it is with him.1 It is a kind of truly cinematographic Mitsein- or what Dos Passos aptly called 'the eye of the camera', the anonymous viewpoint of someone unidentified amongst the characters.
Let us suppose the perception-image to be semi-subjective. But it is difficult to find a status for this semi-subjectivity, since it has no equivalent in natural perception. This is why Pasolini, for his part, used a linguistic analogy. It might be said that a subjective perception-image is a direct discourse and, in a more complex way, that the objective perception-image is like an indirect discourse (the spectator sees the character in such a way as to be able, sooner or later, to state what the latter is supposed to be seeing). Now Pasolini thought that the essential element of the cinematographic image corresponded neither to a direct discourse, nor to an indirect discourse, but to a free indirect discourse. This form, which is particularly prominent in Italian and Russian, raises many
￼Objective and subjective 73
problems for grammarians and linguists: it consists of an enun- ciation [enonciati&n] taken within an utterance [enonce], which itself depends on another enunciation. For example, in French 'Elle rassemble son energie: elk souffrira plutot la torture que perdre sa virginite' [She summons up her strength: shewill rather endure torture than lose her virginity]. The linguist Bakhtin, from whom we borrow this example, states the problem clearly: there is not a simple combination of two fully-constituted subjects of enunciation, one of which would be reporter, the other reported. It is rather a case of an assemblage of enunciation, carrying out two inseparable acts of subjectivation simultaneously, one of which constitutes a character in the first person, but the other of which is present at his birth and brings him on to the scene. There is no mixture or average of two subjects, each belonging to a system, but a differentiation of two correlative subjects in a system which is itself heterogeneous. This view of Bakhtin's - which seems to be taken up by Pasolini - is very interesting;alsoverydifficult.2 Itisnolongermetaphorwhichisthe fundamental act of language, inasmuch as it 'homogenises' the system; it is free indirect discourse, inasmuch as it testifies to a system which is always heterogeneous, far from equilibrium. Free indirect discourse, however, is not amenable to linguisticcategories, because these are only concerned with homogeneous or homogenised systems. It is a matter of style, of stylistics, Pasolini says. And Pasolini adds a valuable comment: the richer a language is in dialects, the more it allows free indirect discourse to flourish, or rather instead of establishing itself on an 'average level' it is differentiated into 'low language and high language' (sociological condition). For his part, Pasolini calls this operation of the two systems of enunciation, or of the two languages in free indirect discourse, Mimesis. This word is perhaps unfortunate, since it is not a case of imitation, but of correlation between two asymmetrical proceedings, acting within language. It is like communicating vessels. However, Pasolini clung to the word 'Mimesis' to emphasise the sacred character of the operation.
Can we not find this dividing-in-two, or this differentiation of the subject in language, in thought and in art? It is the Cogito: an empirical subject cannot be born into the world without simultaneously being reflected in a transcendental subject which thinks it and in which it thinks itself. And the Cogito of art: there is no subject which acts without another which watches it act, and which grasps it as acted, itself assuming the freedom of which it deprives the former. 'Thus two different egos [moi] one of which, conscious of its freedom, sets
￼74 J The perception-image
itself up as independent spectator of a scene which the other would play in a mechanical fashion. But this dividing-in-two never goes to the limit. It is rather an oscillation of the person between two points of view on himself, a hither-and-thither of the spirit. . .', a being- with.3
What, in all this, relates to the cinema? Why does Pasolini think that the cinema is involved, to the extent that an equivalent of free indirect discourse, in the image, allows 'the cinema of poetry' to be defined? A character acts on the screen, and is assumed to see the world in a certain way. But simultaneously the camera sees him, and sees his world, from another point of view which thinks, reflects and transforms the viewpoint of the character. Pasolini says: the director 'has replaced wholesale the neurotic's vision of the world by his own delirious vision of aestheticism'. It is in fact a good thing that the character should be neurotic, to indicate more effectively the difficult birth of a subject into the world. But the camera does not simply give us the vision of the character and of his world; it imposes another vision in which the first is transformed and reflected. This subdivision is what Pasolini calls a 'free indirect subjective'. We will not say that the cinema is always like this - we can see images in the cinema which claim to be objective or subjective - but here something else is at stake: it is a case of going beyond the subjective and the objective towards a pure Form which sets itself up as an autonomous vision of the content. We are no longer faced with subjectiveorobjectiveimages;wearecaughtinacorrelation between a perception-image and a camera-consciousness which transforms it
(the question of knowing whether the image was objective or subjective is no longer raised). It is a very special kind of cinema which has acquired a taste for 'making the camera felt'. And Pasolini analyses a certain number of stylistic procedures which illustrate this reflecting consciousness or this properly cinematographic Cogito: 'insistent' or 'obsessive' framing, which makes the camera await the entry of a character into the frame, wait for him to do and say something and then exit, while it continues to frame the space which has once again become empty, once more leaving the scene to its pure and absolute signification as scene; 'the alternation of different lenses on a same image' and 'the excessive use of the zoom', which doubles the perception of an independent aesthetic consciousness. . . . In short, the perception-image finds its status, as free indirect subjective, from the moment that it reflects its content in a camera-consciousness which has become autonomous ('cinema of poetry').
It may be that the cinema had to go through a slow evolution
￼Objective and subjective 75
before attaining self-consciousness. Pasolini cites as examples Antonioni and Godard. And, indeed, Antonioni is one of the masters of obsessive framing: in it the neurotic, or the man losing his identity, enters into a 'free indirect' relationship with the poetic vision of the director who affirms himself in him, through him, whilst at the same time distinguishing himself from him. The pre-existing frame produces a curious detachment in the character, who watches himself act. The images of the neurotic man or woman thus become the visions of the director, who advances and reflects through the phantasms of his hero. Is this the reason why modern cinema has such need for neurotic characters: to sustain the free indirect discourse, or the 'low language' of the present-day world? But if Antonioni's vision of poetic consciousness is essentially aesthetic, Godard's is rather 'technicist' (but no less poetic). As Pasolini aptly comments, Godard also uses characters who are undoubtedly ill, 'seriously affected', but who are not undergoing treatment, and who have lost nothing of their material degrees of freedom, who are full of life, and who rather represent the birth of a new anthropological type.4
Pasolini might have added himself and Rohmer to his list of examples. For what characterises Pasolini's cinema is a poetic consciousness, which is not strictly aestheticist or technicist, but rather mystical or 'sacred'. This allows Pasolini to bring the perception-image, or the neurosis of his characters, on to a level of vulgarity and bestiality in the lowest subject-matter, while reflecting them in a pure poetic consciousness, animated by the mythical or sacralising element. It is this permutation of the trivial and the noble, this communication between the excremental and the beautiful, this projection into myth, which Pasolini had already diagnosed in free indirect discourse as the essential form of literature. And he succeeds in making it into a cinematographic form, capable of grace as well as horror.5 As for Rohmer, he is perhaps the most striking example of the construction of free indirect subjective images, this time through the intermediary of a truly ethical consciousness. It is very strange, because these two directors - Pasolini and Rohmer - do not seem to have known each other's work very well, but it was they who looked the hardest for a new status for the image, both in order to express the modern world, and in order to introduce an equivalence between the cinema and literature. In Rohmer, on the one hand, it is a case of making the camera a formal ethical consciousness capable of bearing the free indirect image of the modern, neurotic world (the series of Moral Tales); on the other, of reaching a point common to the cinema and literature, with which Rohmer, like Pasolini, can only make contact
￼76 5 The perception-image
by inventing a type of optical and sound image which is the exact equivalent of an indirect discourse (this leads Rohmer to the creation of two seminal works: The Marquise of 0 and Perceval).6 They transformed the problem of the relationship of the image with the word, the sentence or the text: this is the origin of the special role of the commentary and the insert in their films.
What interests us for the moment is not the relationship with language, which we will only be able to consider later. Of Pasolini's extremely important thesis we retain only this: that the perception- image might find a particular status in the free indirect subjective, which would be like a reflexion of the image in a camera-self- consciousness. Knowing whether the image is objective or subjective no longer matters: it is semi-subjective, if one wishes, but this semi- subjectivity does not indicate anything variable or uncertain. It no longer marks an oscillationbetween two poles, but animmobilisation according to a higher aesthetic form. The perception-image finds here the particular sign of its composition. We might call it - to borrow one of Peirce's terms - a dicisign (but for Peirce this is the proposition in general, while for us it is the special case of the free indirect proposition, or rather, of the corresponding image). The camera-consciousness then takes on an extremely formal determination.
2 Towards another state of perception: liquid perception
This solution, however, only relates to a nominal definition of 'subjective' and 'objective'. It implies that the cinema has reached an evolved state, having learned to mistrust the movement-image. But what happens if we take as our starting-point a real definition of the two poles, or of the double system? Bergsonianism suggested the following definition: a subjective perception is one in which the images vary in relation to a central and privileged image; an objective perception is one where, as in things, all the images vary in relation to one another, onall their facets and in all their parts. These definitions affirm not only the difference between two poles of perception, but also the possibility of passing from the subjective to the objective pole. For the more the privileged centre is itself put into movement, the more it will tend towards an acentred system where the images vary in relation to one another and tend to become like the reciprocal actions and vibrations of a pure matter. What can be more subjective than a delirium, a dream, a hallucination?But what can be closer to a materiality made
￼Liquid perception 77
up of luminous wave and molecular interaction? The French school and German Expressionism discovered the subjective image, but at the same time they took it to the limits of the universe. By putting the centre of reference itself into movement, the movement of the parts was raised to the set [ensemble]; that of the relative to the absolute; that of succession to simultaneism. In Dupont's Vaudeville it was the music-hall scene where the swaying trapeze-artiste sees the crowd and the ceiling, one in the other, as a shower of sparks and a whirlpool of floating spots.7 And in Epstein's Coeurfidele, it was the travelling fair, where everything tends towards the simultaneity of the movement of the one who sees and the movement seen, in the dizzy disappearance of fixed points. Here the perception-image had already undoubtedly been transformed by an aesthetic consciousness (cf. the French school's famous 'photogeny'). But this aesthetic consciousness was not yet formal and reflected consciousness which went beyond movement - it was a naive, or rather non-thetic consciousness, as the phenomenologists would say, a consciousness in act [enacte], which amplified movement and introduced it into matter, with all the delight of discovering the activity of montage and of the camera. It was something different, neither better nor worse.
Jean Renoir's predilection for running water has often been discussed. But this predilection was common to all the members of the French school (although Renoir gave it a very special dimension). In the French school, it is sometimes the river and its course, sometimes the canal, its locks and its barges, sometimes the sea, its frontier with the land, the port, the lighthouse asluminousquality.If the idea of a passive camera had occurred to them, they would have set it up beside running water. L'Herbier had started off with a plan, Le Torrent, in which water was to be the main character. And L'Homme du large treated the sea not merely as an object of particular perception, but as a perceptive system distinct from earthly perceptions, a 'language' different from earthly language.8 A considerable part of Epstein's and Gremillon's work forms a sort of Breton school, which realises the cinematographic dream of a drama without characters, or at least which would move from Nature to man. Why does water seem to correspond to all the requirements of this French school: abstract aesthetic requirement, social documentary requirement, narrative dramatic requirement? It is firstly because water is the most perfect environment in which movement can be extracted from the thing moved, or mobility from movement itself. This is the origin of the visual and auditory importance of water in research on rhythm. The liquid element was to prolong, transmit and
￼78 5 The perception-image
diffuse in all directions what Gance had started with iron, with the railway. Jean Mitry, in his experimental attempts, began with the railway, and then moved on to water as the image which could give us the real as vibration in its deepest sense: from Pacific 231 to Images pour Debussy.9 And Gremillon's documentary work passes through this movement, from the mechanics of solids to a mechanics of fluids, from industry to its marine background.
The liquid abstract is also the concrete environment of a type of men, of a race of men who do not live in quite the same way as those of the earth, do not perceive and feel like them: Ouessant and then Sein gave Epstein the perfect documentary, where the inhabitants alone can play their own role (Finis Terrae, The Sea of Ravens). Finally, the limit of the earth and the waters becomes the scene of a drama where there is a confrontation between, on one hand, the land moorings and, on the other, the mooring - ropes, the two-ropes and free floating cords. Epstein's La belle Nivernaise already opposed - in relation to the barge - the solidity of the earth to the fluidity of the sky and the water, Gremillon's Maldone opposed the organisation of roots, land and household to the assemblage of the canal: 'man-ship-horse'. The drama was that it was necessary to break the links with the earth, of father with son, husband with wife and mistress, woman with lover, children with parents; to retreat into solitudeto achievehumansolidarity,classsolidarity.And althougha final reconciliation is not ruled out, the lighthouse or the dam were the scene of a deadly confrontation between the madness of the earth and the superior justice of the water; the lunacy of the furious son in Gardiem de laphare; the great fall of the lord in fancy dress in Lumiere fete. Of course not every occupation is related to the sea: but
Gremillon's idea is that the proletarian or the worker reconstitutes everywhere - even on land and in the aerial element of The Woman Who Dared - the conditions of a floating population,of a seapeople, capable of revealing and transforming the nature of the economic and commercial interests at play in a society, on the condition that, following the Marxist formula, it 'cuts the umbilical cord which attaches it to the earth'.10 It is in this sense that occupations connected with the sea are not a relic or an insular type of folklore: they are the horizon of all occupations, even that of the woman doctor in L'Amour d'une femme. They extract the relationship with the Element and with Man, which is present in any occupation; and even mechanics, industry, proletarianisation find their truth in an empire of the seas (or of the air). Grernillon vigorously opposed the family and peasant \terrien] ideal of Vichy. Few directors have filmed man's
￼Liquid perception 79
work so well, even discovering in it the equivalent of a sea: even the avalanches of stones like waves.
These are the two opposed systems: the perceptions, affections and actions of men on land, and the perceptions, affections and actions of men of the sea. This comes across clearly in Gremillon's Stormy
Waters, where the captain on land is drawn back to fixed centres, images of the wife or lover, imageof the villa facing the sea, which are all so many points of egoistical subjectivation, whilst the sea presents him with an objectivity as universal variation, solidarity of all the parts, justice beyond men, where the fixed point of the tow-ropes, always called into question, no longer has validity except between two movements. But it is Vigo's L'Atalante which was to bring this opposition to its peak. As J. P. Bamberger shows, on land there is not the same regime of movement, not the same 'grace' as on the sea, in the sea: terrestrial movement is in perpetual disequilibrium because the motive force is always outside the centre of gravity (the newsvendor's bicycle); while aquatic movement is like the displace- ment of the centre of gravity, according to a simple objective law, straight or elliptical. (This accounts for the apparent clumsiness of this movement when it takes place on land or even on the barge - a crab-like walk, snaking or twirling - but this is like an other-worldly grace.) And on land, movement always takes place from one point to another, always between two points, while on water the point is always between two movements: it thus marks the conversion or the inversion of movement, as in the hydraulic relationship of a dive and counter-dive, which is found in the movement of the camera itself (the final fall of the entwined bodies of the two lovers has no end, but is converted into an ascending movement). Nor is it the same regime of passion, of affection: in one case dominated by commodities, the fetish, the article of clothing, the partial object and the memory- object: in the other case, attaining what has been called the 'objectivity' of bodies, which may reveal hideousness under clothing, but also grace under a coarse appearance. If there is any reconciliation between land and sea, this takes place in father Jules, but only because he knows how to impose spontaneously on the land the same law as the sea: his cabin contains the most extraordinary fetishes, partial objects, souvenirs and scrap; however, he does not make them a memory, but a pure mosaic of present states, down to the old record which works again." Finally, a clairvoyant function is developed in water, in opposition to earthly vision: it is in the water that the loved one who has disappeared is revealed, as if perception enjoyed a scope and interaction, a truth which it did not have on land. Even in Nice, it
￼80 5 The perception-image
was the very presence of water which allowed the bourgeoisie to be described as a monstrous organic body.12 It is the water which revealed the hideousness of bourgeois bodies beneath their clothes, just as it now reveals the softness and strength of the loved one's body. The bourgeoisie is reduced to the objectivity of a fetish-body, a scrap-body, to which childhood, love, navigation oppose their integral bodies. 'Objectivity', equilibrium, justice are not of the earth: they are the preserve of water.
Finally, what the French school found in water was the promise or implication of another state of perception: a more than human perception, a perception not tailored to solids, which no longer had the solid as object, as condition, as milieu. A more delicate and vaster perception, a molecular perception, peculiar to a 'cine-eye'. This was the result of starting from a real definition of the two poles of perception: the perception-image was not to be reflected in a formal consciousness, but was to be split into two states, one molecular and the other molar, one liquid and the other solid, one drawing along and effacing the other. The sign of perception would not therefore be a 'dicisign', but a reume.13 While the dicisign set up a frame which isolated and solidified the image, the reume referred to an image in the process of becoming liquid, which passed through or under the frame. The camera-consciousness became a reume since it was actualised in a flowing perception and thus arrived at a material determination, at a flowing-matter. The French school, however, pointed towards this other state, this other perception, this clairvoyant function, rather than assuming full responsibility for it. Other than in its abstract attempts (among which Vigo's Taris, roidel'eau features), it created from it not the new image, but the limitor ultimatepoint of convergence of the movement-images, of the average-images in the context of a story that retained its solidity. This story was so deeply imbued with rhythm that this was certainly no defect.
5 Towards a gaseous perception
In the 'cine-eye', Vertov was aimingto attainor regain the system of universal variation, in itself. All the images vary as a function of each other, on all their facets and in all their parts. Vertov himself defined the cine-eye: it is that which 'couples together any point whatsoever of the universein any temporal order whatsoever'.H Everything isat the service of variation and interaction: slow or high speed shots, superimposition, fragmentation,deceleration [demultiplicatim], micro-
￼Towards a gaseous perception 81
shooting [micro-prise de ime\. This is not a human eye - even an improved one. For, although the human eye can surmount some of its limitations with the help of contraptions and instruments, there is one which it cannot surmount, since it is its own condition of possibility. Its relative immobility as a receptive organ means that all images vary for a single one, in relation to a privileged image. And, if the camera is considered as apparatus for shooting film, it is subject to the same conditioning limitation. But the cinema is not simply the camera: it is montage. And if from the point of view of the human eye, montage is undoubtedly a construction, from the point of view of another eye, it ceases to be one; it is the pure vision of a non-human eye, of an eye which would be in things. Universal variation, universal interaction (modulation) is what Cezanne had already called the world before man, 'dawn of ourselves', 'iridescent chaos', 'virginity of the world'. It is not surprisingthat we haveto construct it since it is given only to the eye which we do not have. It says a lot for Mitry's partisanship that he could condemn in Vertov a contradiction for which he would not dare to reproach a painter: a pseudo-contradiction between creativity (montage) and integrity (the real).15 What montage does, according to Vertov, is to carry perception into things, to put perception into matter, so that any point whatsoever in space itself perceives all the points on which it acts, or which act on it, however far these actions and reactions extend. This is the definition of objectivity, 'to see without boundaries or distances'. Thus in this respect all procedures are legitimate, they are no longer trick shots.16 The materialist Vertov realises the materialist programme of the first chapter of Matter and Memorythrough the cinema, the in-itself of the image. V ertov's non- human eye, the cine-eye, is not the eye of a fly or of an eagle, the eye of another animal. Neither is it - in an Epsteinian way - the eye of the spirit endowed with a temporal perspective, which might apprehend the spiritual whole. On the contrary, it is the eye of matter, the eye in matter, not subject to time, which has 'conquered' time, which reaches the 'negative of time', and which knows no other whole than the material universe and its extension (here Vertov and Epstein are contrasted as two different levels of the same montage-camera set).
This is Vertov's first assemblage. It is, first, a machineassemblage of movement-images. We have seen that the gap, the interval between two movements sketches out an empty place which prefigures the human subject in so far as he appropriates perception to himself. But, for Vertov, the most important thing was to restore the intervals to matter. This is the meaning of montage, and of the
￼82 5 The perception-image
'theory of intervals', which is more pro found than that of movement. The interval is no longer that which separates a reaction from the action experienced, which measures the incommensurability and unforeseeability of the reaction but, on the contrary, that which - an action being given in a point of the universe - will find the appropriate reaction in some other point [point quelconque], however distant it is ('to find in life the response to the treated subject, the resultant among the millions of facts which bear a relation to this subject'). The originality of the Vertovian theory of the intervalis that it no longer marks a gap which is carved out, a distancing between two consecutive images but, on the contrary, a correlation of two images which are distant (and incommensurable from the viewpoint of our human perception). And, on the other hand, the cinema could not run in this way from one end of the universe to the other without having at its disposal an agent which was capable of making all the parts converge: what Vertov took from the spirit - that is, the power of a whole which is constantly becoming - now passes into the correlate of matter, of its variations and interactions. In fact the machine assemblage of things, of images in themselves, has as its correlate a collective assemblage of enunciation. Already in the silent film, Vertov used the intertitle in an original way, so the word formed a bloc with the image, a sort of ideogram.I7 These are the two fundamental aspects of the assemblage: the image-machine is inseparable from a type of utterances, from a properly cinematographic enunciation. In Vertov this is clearly a case of Soviet revolutionary consciousness, of the 'communist deciphering of reality'. It is that
which unites the man of tomorrow with the world before man, communist man with the material universe of interactions defined as 'community' (reciprocal action between the agent and the patient).18 A Sixth of the Worldhows the interaction at a distance, within the USSR, between the most varied peoples, herds of animals, industries, cultures, exchanges of all kinds in the process of conquering time.
Annette Michelson is right to say that Man with a Movie-Camera represents an evolution on Vertov's part, as though he had discovered a more complete conception of the assemblage. For the previous conception went no further than the movement-image, that is, an image composed of photogrammes, an intermediate-image endowed with movement. It was therefore still an image corresponding to human perception, whatever the treatment to which it was subjected by montage. But what happens if montage is introduced into the very constituent of the image? We go back from an image of a peasant woman to a series of its photogrammes, or else we move from
￼Towards a gaseous perception 83
a series of photogrammes of children to images of these children in movement. By extending this procedure, we contrast the image of a cyclist cycling, and the same image, re-filmed, reflected, presented as though projected on a screen. Rene Glair's The Crazy Ray had a great influence on Vertov: for it reconciled a human world with the absence of man. For the ray of the mad scientist (the film-maker) froze movement, blocked the action, in order to release it in a sort of 'electrical discharge'. The town-desert, the town absent from itself, will always haunt the cinema, as though possessing a secret. The secret is yet another meaning of the notion of interval: it now designates the point at which movement stops and, in stopping, gains thepowertogointoreverse,accelerate,slowdown. ...Nolongeris it enough to reverse movement, as Vertov did in the name of interaction when he moved from the dead meat to the live flesh. The point which makes the reversal or modification necessary must be reached.19 For, in Vertov's view, th; frame is not simply a return to the photo: if it belongs to the cinema, this is because it is the genetic element of the image, or the differential element of the movement. It does not 'terminate' the movement without also being the principle of its acceleration, its deceleration and its variation.It isthe vibration, the elementary solicitation of which movement is made up at each instant, the clinamen of Epicurean materialism. Thus the photogramme is inseparable from the series which makes it vibrate in relation to the movement which derives from it. And, if the cinema goes beyond perception, it is in the sense that it reaches to the genetic element of all possible perception, that is, the point which changes, and which makesperception change, thedifferential ofperceptionitself.Vertov thus puts the three inseparable aspects of a single going beyond into effect: from the camera to montage, from movement to the interval,
from the image to the photogramme.
As a Soviet film-maker, Vertov develops a scientific conception of
montage. But dialectical montage seems to be a place of confrontation, of opposition rather than an intermediary. When Eisenstein condemns Vertov's 'Formalist fooling about', this must surely be because the two directors have neither the same conception, nor the same practice of the dialectic. For Eisenstein, there is only a dialectic of man andof Nature, man in Nature, and Nature in man; 'non-indifferent' Nature and non-separated Man. For Vertov, the dialectic is in matter and of matter, and can only reconcile a non-human perception with the overman of the future, material community and formal communism. This helps us to reach a conclusion about the differences between Vertov, on the one hand, and the French school on the other. If we
￼84 5 The perception-image
consider the identical procedures used by both - quantitative montage, high speed and slow motion, superimposition, or even immobilisation - we seethat with the French these show primarily a spiritual power of the cinema, a spiritual aspect of the 'shot'. It is through the spirit that man goes beyond the limits of perception, and, as Gance says, superimpositions are the images of feelings and thoughts by which the soul 'envelops' bodies and 'precedes' them. Vertov's use of these procedures is quite different: for him superimposition was to express the interaction of distant material points, and high speed and slow motion the differential of physical movement. But perhaps even from this point of view we do not grasp the radical difference. It emerges as soon as we return to the reasons which made the French give such prominence to the liquid image: for it was there that human perception went beyond its own limits, and movement discovered the spiritual totality which it expressed, whilst for Vertov the liquid image is still inadequate, failing to reach the particle of matter. Movement must go beyond itself, but to its material, energic element. The cinematographic image does not therefore have the lreumi as sign, but the 'gramme', the 'engramme', the 'photogramme'. It is its sign of genesis. In the final analysis, we would have to speak of a perception which was no longer liquid but gaseous. For, if we start out from a solid state, where molecules are not free to move about (molar or human perception), we move next to a liquid state, where the molecules move about and merge into one another, but we finally reach a gaseous state, defined by the free movement of each molecule. According to Vertov, it is perhaps necessary to move beyond flowing to that stage: the particle of matter or gaseous perception.
In any case, the American experimental cinema was to go as far as that and, breaking with the French school's aquatic lyricism, was to recognise Vertov's influence. A whole aspect of that cinema is concerned with attaining a pure perception, as it is in things or in matter, to the point to which molecular interactions extend. Brakhage explores a Ce/annian world before man, a dawn of ourselves, by filming all the shades of green seen by a baby in the prairie.20 Michael Snow deprives the camera of any centre and films the universal interaction of images which vary in relation to one another, on all their facets and in all their parts (The Central Region).21 Belson and Jacobs trace coloured forms and movements back to molecular or atomic forces (Phenomena, Momentum). Now, if there is any constant factor in this cinema, it is the construction by various means of gaseous states of perception. Flickering montage: extraction
￼Towards a gaseous perception 85
of the photogramme beyond the intermediate image, and of vibration beyond movement, (whence the notion of the 'photogramme-shot', as defined by the loop procedure, in which a series of photogrammes are repeated with the contingent intervals allowed by the superimpo- sition). Hyper-rapid montage: extraction of a point of inversion or transformation (for the correlation of the immobilisation of the image is the extreme mobility of the support, and the photogramme acts as the differential element, producing refulgence and great haste). Re- filming or re-recording: extraction of a particle of matter (the re- filming producing a flattening of space, which takes on a 'pointilliste' texture in the manner of Seurat, allowing the interaction of two points at a distance to be apprehended).22 In all these respects, the photogramme is not a reversion to photography but rather, following Bergson's formula, the creative apprehension of this photo 'snapped and taken in the interior of things and for all the points of space'. And we are increasingly witnessing, from the photogramme to the video, the formation of an image defined by molecular parameters.
All these procedures act together and vary to form the cinema as machine assemblage of matter-images. The question of the corre- sponding assemblage of enunciation remains open, since Vertov's answer (Communist society) has lost its meaning. Might the answer be: drugs as the American community? If drugs have this effect, however, it is only because of the perceptive experimentation which they induce, which may be brought about by quite different means. In reality, we will only be able to raise the problem of enunciation when we are in a position to analyse the sound image for itself. To follow Castaneda's programme of initiation:drugs are supposed to stop the world, to release the perception of 'doing', that is, to substitute pure auditory and optical perceptions for motor-sensory perceptions; to make one see the molecular intervals, the holes in sounds, in forms, and even in water; but also, in this stopped world, to make lines of speed pass through these holes in the world.23 This isthe programme of the third state of the image, the gaseous image, beyond the solid and the liquid: to reach 'another' perception, which is also the genetic element of all perception. Camera-consciousness raises itself to a determination which is no longer formal or material, but genetic and differential. We have moved from a real to a genetic definition of perception.
Landow's film, Bardo Follies, sums up in this respect the whole of the process, and the transition from the liquid state to the gaseous state:
￼86
5 The perception-image
The film opens with an image, on a film loop, of a woman floating with a lifebouy, who waves to us at each return of the loop. After about ten minutes (there is also an abridged version), the same loop appears twice inside two circles on a black ground. Then, for a moment, three circles appear. The image of the film in the circles starts to burn, inducing the spread of a seething mould of a predominantly orange colour. The whole screen is filled by the photogramme on fire, which disintegrates in slow motion into a very granular soft focus. Another photogramme burns; the whole screen throbs with melting celluloid. This effect was probably obtained by several series of re-filmings on screen, the result being that the screen itself seems to throb and be consumed. The tension of the desynchronised loop is kept up throughout the whole of this fragment, in which the film itself seems to die. After a long pause, the screen divides up into bubbles of air in water, filmed through a microscope with coloured filters, a different colour for each sid
